<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>I</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-1" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>Part First</h2>
			<p>To begin with I wish to disclaim the possession of those high gifts of imagination and expression which would have enabled my pen to create for the reader the personality of the man who called himself, after the Russian custom, Cyril son of Isidor⁠—Kirylo Sidorovitch⁠—Razumov.</p>
			<p>If I have ever had these gifts in any sort of living form they have been smothered out of existence a long time ago under a wilderness of words. Words, as is well known, are the great foes of reality. I have been for many years a teacher of languages. It is an occupation which at length becomes fatal to whatever share of imagination, observation, and insight an ordinary person may be heir to. To a teacher of languages there comes a time when the world is but a place of many words and man appears a mere talking animal not much more wonderful than a parrot.</p>
			<p>This being so, I could not have observed Mr. Razumov or guessed at his reality by the force of insight, much less have imagined him as he was. Even to invent the mere bald facts of his life would have been utterly beyond my powers. But I think that without this declaration the readers of these pages will be able to detect in the story the marks of documentary evidence. And that is perfectly correct. It is based on a document; all I have brought to it is my knowledge of the Russian language, which is sufficient for what is attempted here. The document, of course, is something in the nature of a journal, a diary, yet not exactly that in its actual form. For instance, most of it was not written up from day to day, though all the entries are dated. Some of these entries cover months of time and extend over dozens of pages. All the earlier part is a retrospect, in a narrative form, relating to an event which took place about a year before.</p>
			<p>I must mention that I have lived for a long time in Geneva. A whole quarter of that town, on account of many Russians residing there, is called La Petite Russie⁠—Little Russia. I had a rather extensive connexion in Little Russia at that time. Yet I confess that I have no comprehension of the Russian character. The illogicality of their attitude, the arbitrariness of their conclusions, the frequency of the exceptional, should present no difficulty to a student of many grammars; but there must be something else in the way, some special human trait⁠—one of those subtle differences that are beyond the ken of mere professors. What must remain striking to a teacher of languages is the Russians’ extraordinary love of words. They gather them up; they cherish them, but they don’t hoard them in their breasts; on the contrary, they are always ready to pour them out by the hour or by the night with an enthusiasm, a sweeping abundance, with such an aptness of application sometimes that, as in the case of very accomplished parrots, one can’t defend oneself from the suspicion that they really understand what they say. There is a generosity in their ardour of speech which removes it as far as possible from common loquacity; and it is ever too disconnected to be classed as eloquence.⁠ ⁠… But I must apologize for this digression.</p>
			<p>It would be idle to inquire why Mr. Razumov has left this record behind him. It is inconceivable that he should have wished any human eye to see it. A mysterious impulse of human nature comes into play here. Putting aside Samuel Pepys, who has forced in this way the door of immortality, innumerable people, criminals, saints, philosophers, young girls, statesmen, and simple imbeciles, have kept self-revealing records from vanity no doubt, but also from other more inscrutable motives. There must be a wonderful soothing power in mere words since so many men have used them for self-communion. Being myself a quiet individual I take it that what all men are really after is some form or perhaps only some formula of peace. Certainly they are crying loud enough for it at the present day. What sort of peace Kirylo Sidorovitch Razumov expected to find in the writing up of his record it passeth my understanding to guess.</p>
			<p>The fact remains that he has written it.</p>
			<p>Mr. Razumov was a tall, well-proportioned young man, quite unusually dark for a Russian from the Central Provinces. His good looks would have been unquestionable if it had not been for a peculiar lack of fineness in the features. It was as if a face modelled vigorously in wax (with some approach even to a classical correctness of type) had been held close to a fire till all sharpness of line had been lost in the softening of the material. But even thus he was sufficiently good-looking. His manner, too, was good. In discussion he was easily swayed by argument and authority. With his younger compatriots he took the attitude of an inscrutable listener, a listener of the kind that hears you out intelligently and then⁠—just changes the subject.</p>
			<p>This sort of trick, which may arise either from intellectual insufficiency or from an imperfect trust in one’s own convictions, procured for Mr. Razumov a reputation of profundity. Amongst a lot of exuberant talkers, in the habit of exhausting themselves daily by ardent discussion, a comparatively taciturn personality is naturally credited with reserve power. By his comrades at the St. Petersburg University, Kirylo Sidorovitch Razumov, third year’s student in philosophy, was looked upon as a strong nature⁠—an altogether trustworthy man. This, in a country where an opinion may be a legal crime visited by death or sometimes by a fate worse than mere death, meant that he was worthy of being trusted with forbidden opinions. He was liked also for his amiability and for his quiet readiness to oblige his comrades even at the cost of personal inconvenience.</p>
			<p>Mr. Razumov was supposed to be the son of an Archpriest and to be protected by a distinguished nobleman⁠—perhaps of his own distant province. But his outward appearance accorded badly with such humble origin. Such a descent was not credible. It was, indeed, suggested that Mr. Razumov was the son of an Archpriest’s pretty daughter⁠—which, of course, would put a different complexion on the matter. This theory also rendered intelligible the protection of the distinguished nobleman. All this, however, had never been investigated maliciously or otherwise. No one knew or cared who the nobleman in question was. Razumov received a modest but very sufficient allowance from the hands of an obscure attorney, who seemed to act as his guardian in some measure. Now and then he appeared at some professor’s informal reception. Apart from that Razumov was not known to have any social relations in the town. He attended the obligatory lectures regularly and was considered by the authorities as a very promising student. He worked at home in the manner of a man who means to get on, but did not shut himself up severely for that purpose. He was always accessible, and there was nothing secret or reserved in his life.</p>
			<section id="chapter-1-1" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</h3>
				<p>The origin of Mr. Razumov’s record is connected with an event characteristic of modern Russia in the actual fact: the assassination of a prominent statesman⁠—and still more characteristic of the moral corruption of an oppressed society where the noblest aspirations of humanity, the desire of freedom, an ardent patriotism, the love of justice, the sense of pity, and even the fidelity of simple minds are prostituted to the lusts of hate and fear, the inseparable companions of an uneasy despotism.</p>
				<p>The fact alluded to above is the successful attempt on the life of Mr. de P⁠—, the President of the notorious Repressive Commission of some years ago, the Minister of State invested with extraordinary powers. The newspapers made noise enough about that fanatical, narrow-chested figure in gold-laced uniform, with a face of crumpled parchment, insipid, bespectacled eyes, and the cross of the Order of St. Procopius hung under the skinny throat. For a time, it may be remembered, not a month passed without his portrait appearing in some one of the illustrated papers of Europe. He served the monarchy by imprisoning, exiling, or sending to the gallows men and women, young and old, with an equable, unwearied industry. In his mystic acceptance of the principle of autocracy he was bent on extirpating from the land every vestige of anything that resembled freedom in public institutions; and in his ruthless persecution of the rising generation he seemed to aim at the destruction of the very hope of liberty itself.</p>
				<p>It is said that this execrated personality had not enough imagination to be aware of the hate he inspired. It is hardly credible; but it is a fact that he took very few precautions for his safety. In the preamble of a certain famous State paper he had declared once that “the thought of liberty has never existed in the Act of the Creator. From the multitude of men’s counsel nothing could come but revolt and disorder; and revolt and disorder in a world created for obedience and stability is sin. It was not Reason but Authority which expressed the Divine Intention. God was the Autocrat of the Universe.⁠ ⁠…” It may be that the man who made this declaration believed that heaven itself was bound to protect him in his remorseless defence of Autocracy on this earth.</p>
				<p>No doubt the vigilance of the police saved him many times; but, as a matter of fact, when his appointed fate overtook him, the competent authorities could not have given him any warning. They had no knowledge of any conspiracy against the Minister’s life, had no hint of any plot through their usual channels of information, had seen no signs, were aware of no suspicious movements or dangerous persons.</p>
				<p>Mr. de P⁠— was being driven towards the railway station in a two-horse uncovered sleigh with footman and coachman on the box. Snow had been falling all night, making the roadway, uncleared as yet at this early hour, very heavy for the horses. It was still falling thickly. But the sleigh must have been observed and marked down. As it drew over to the left before taking a turn, the footman noticed a peasant walking slowly on the edge of the pavement with his hands in the pockets of his sheepskin coat and his shoulders hunched up to his ears under the falling snow. On being overtaken this peasant suddenly faced about and swung his arm. In an instant there was a terrible shock, a detonation muffled in the multitude of snowflakes; both horses lay dead and mangled on the ground and the coachman, with a shrill cry, had fallen off the box mortally wounded. The footman (who survived) had no time to see the face of the man in the sheepskin coat. After throwing the bomb this last got away, but it is supposed that, seeing a lot of people surging up on all sides of him in the falling snow, and all running towards the scene of the explosion, he thought it safer to turn back with them.</p>
				<p>In an incredibly short time an excited crowd assembled round the sledge. The Minister-President, getting out unhurt into the deep snow, stood near the groaning coachman and addressed the people repeatedly in his weak, colourless voice: “I beg of you to keep off: For the love of God, I beg of you good people to keep off.”</p>
				<p>It was then that a tall young man who had remained standing perfectly still within a carriage gateway, two houses lower down, stepped out into the street and walking up rapidly flung another bomb over the heads of the crowd. It actually struck the Minister-President on the shoulder as he stooped over his dying servant, then falling between his feet exploded with a terrific concentrated violence, striking him dead to the ground, finishing the wounded man and practically annihilating the empty sledge in the twinkling of an eye. With a yell of horror the crowd broke up and fled in all directions, except for those who fell dead or dying where they stood nearest to the Minister-President, and one or two others who did not fall till they had run a little way.</p>
				<p>The first explosion had brought together a crowd as if by enchantment, the second made as swiftly a solitude in the street for hundreds of yards in each direction. Through the falling snow people looked from afar at the small heap of dead bodies lying upon each other near the carcases of the two horses. Nobody dared to approach till some Cossacks of a street-patrol galloped up and, dismounting, began to turn over the dead. Amongst the innocent victims of the second explosion laid out on the pavement there was a body dressed in a peasant’s sheepskin coat; but the face was unrecognisable, there was absolutely nothing found in the pockets of its poor clothing, and it was the only one whose identity was never established.</p>
				<p>That day Mr. Razumov got up at his usual hour and spent the morning within the University buildings listening to the lectures and working for some time in the library. He heard the first vague rumour of something in the way of bomb-throwing at the table of the students’ ordinary, where he was accustomed to eat his two o’clock dinner. But this rumour was made up of mere whispers, and this was Russia, where it was not always safe, for a student especially, to appear too much interested in certain kinds of whispers. Razumov was one of those men who, living in a period of mental and political unrest, keep an instinctive hold on normal, practical, everyday life. He was aware of the emotional tension of his time; he even responded to it in an indefinite way. But his main concern was with his work, his studies, and with his own future.</p>
				<p>Officially and in fact without a family (for the daughter of the Archpriest had long been dead), no home influences had shaped his opinions or his feelings. He was as lonely in the world as a man swimming in the deep sea. The word Razumov was the mere label of a solitary individuality. There were no Razumovs belonging to him anywhere. His closest parentage was defined in the statement that he was a Russian. Whatever good he expected from life would be given to or withheld from his hopes by that connexion alone. This immense parentage suffered from the throes of internal dissensions, and he shrank mentally from the fray as a good-natured man may shrink from taking definite sides in a violent family quarrel.</p>
				<p>Razumov, going home, reflected that having prepared all the matters of the forthcoming examination, he could now devote his time to the subject of the prize essay. He hankered after the silver medal. The prize was offered by the Ministry of Education; the names of the competitors would be submitted to the Minister himself. The mere fact of trying would be considered meritorious in the higher quarters; and the possessor of the prize would have a claim to an administrative appointment of the better sort after he had taken his degree. The student Razumov in an access of elation forgot the dangers menacing the stability of the institutions which give rewards and appointments. But remembering the medallist of the year before, Razumov, the young man of no parentage, was sobered. He and some others happened to be assembled in their comrade’s rooms at the very time when that last received the official advice of his success. He was a quiet, unassuming young man: “Forgive me,” he had said with a faint apologetic smile and taking up his cap, “I am going out to order up some wine. But I must first send a telegram to my folk at home. I say! Won’t the old people make it a festive time for the neighbours for twenty miles around our place.”</p>
				<p>Razumov thought there was nothing of that sort for him in the world. His success would matter to no one. But he felt no bitterness against the nobleman his protector, who was not a provincial magnate as was generally supposed. He was in fact nobody less than Prince K⁠—, once a great and splendid figure in the world and now, his day being over, a Senator and a gouty invalid, living in a still splendid but more domestic manner. He had some young children and a wife as aristocratic and proud as himself.</p>
				<p>In all his life Razumov was allowed only once to come into personal contact with the Prince.</p>
				<p>It had the air of a chance meeting in the little attorney’s office. One day Razumov, coming in by appointment, found a stranger standing there⁠—a tall, aristocratic-looking Personage with silky, grey sidewhiskers. The bald-headed, sly little lawyer-fellow called out, “Come in⁠—come in, Mr. Razumov,” with a sort of ironic heartiness. Then turning deferentially to the stranger with the grand air, “A ward of mine, your Excellency. One of the most promising students of his faculty in the St. Petersburg University.”</p>
				<p>To his intense surprise Razumov saw a white shapely hand extended to him. He took it in great confusion (it was soft and passive) and heard at the same time a condescending murmur in which he caught only the words “Satisfactory” and “Persevere.” But the most amazing thing of all was to feel suddenly a distinct pressure of the white shapely hand just before it was withdrawn: a light pressure like a secret sign. The emotion of it was terrible. Razumov’s heart seemed to leap into his throat. When he raised his eyes the aristocratic personage, motioning the little lawyer aside, had opened the door and was going out.</p>
				<p>The attorney rummaged amongst the papers on his desk for a time. “Do you know who that was?” he asked suddenly.</p>
				<p>Razumov, whose heart was thumping hard yet, shook his head in silence.</p>
				<p>“That was Prince K⁠—. You wonder what he could be doing in the hole of a poor legal rat like myself⁠—eh? These awfully great people have their sentimental curiosities like common sinners. But if I were you, Kirylo Sidorovitch,” he continued, leering and laying a peculiar emphasis on the patronymic, “I wouldn’t boast at large of the introduction. It would not be prudent, Kirylo Sidorovitch. Oh dear no! It would be in fact dangerous for your future.”</p>
				<p>The young man’s ears burned like fire; his sight was dim. “That man!” Razumov was saying to himself. “He!”</p>
				<p>Henceforth it was by this monosyllable that Mr. Razumov got into the habit of referring mentally to the stranger with grey silky side-whiskers. From that time too, when walking in the more fashionable quarters, he noted with interest the magnificent horses and carriages with Prince K⁠—’s liveries on the box. Once he saw the Princess get out⁠—she was shopping⁠—followed by two girls, of which one was nearly a head taller than the other. Their fair hair hung loose down their backs in the English style; they had merry eyes, their coats, muffs, and little fur caps were exactly alike, and their cheeks and noses were tinged a cheerful pink by the frost. They crossed the pavement in front of him, and Razumov went on his way smiling shyly to himself. “His” daughters. They resembled “Him.” The young man felt a glow of warm friendliness towards these girls who would never know of his existence. Presently they would marry Generals or Kammerherrs and have girls and boys of their own, who perhaps would be aware of him as a celebrated old professor, decorated, possibly a Privy Councillor, one of the glories of Russia⁠—nothing more!</p>
				<p>But a celebrated professor was a somebody. Distinction would convert the label Razumov into an honoured name. There was nothing strange in the student Razumov’s wish for distinction. A man’s real life is that accorded to him in the thoughts of other men by reason of respect or natural love. Returning home on the day of the attempt on Mr. de P⁠—’s life Razumov resolved to have a good try for the silver medal.</p>
				<p>Climbing slowly the four flights of the dark, dirty staircase in the house where he had his lodgings, he felt confident of success. The winner’s name would be published in the papers on New Year’s Day. And at the thought that “He” would most probably read it there, Razumov stopped short on the stairs for an instant, then went on smiling faintly at his own emotion. “This is but a shadow,” he said to himself, “but the medal is a solid beginning.”</p>
				<p>With those ideas of industry in his head the warmth of his room was agreeable and encouraging. “I shall put in four hours of good work,” he thought. But no sooner had he closed the door than he was horribly startled. All black against the usual tall stove of white tiles gleaming in the dusk, stood a strange figure, wearing a skirted, close-fitting, brown cloth coat strapped round the waist, in long boots, and with a little Astrakhan cap on its head. It loomed lithe and martial. Razumov was utterly confounded. It was only when the figure advancing two paces asked in an untroubled, grave voice if the outer door was closed that he regained his power of speech.</p>
				<p>“Haldin!⁠ ⁠… Victor Victorovitch!⁠ ⁠… Is that you?⁠ ⁠… Yes. The outer door is shut all right. But this is indeed unexpected.”</p>
				<p>Victor Haldin, a student older than most of his contemporaries at the University, was not one of the industrious set. He was hardly ever seen at lectures; the authorities had marked him as “restless” and “unsound “⁠—very bad notes. But he had a great personal prestige with his comrades and influenced their thoughts. Razumov had never been intimate with him. They had met from time to time at gatherings in other students’ houses. They had even had a discussion together⁠—one of those discussions on first principles dear to the sanguine minds of youth.</p>
				<p>Razumov wished the man had chosen some other time to come for a chat. He felt in good trim to tackle the prize essay. But as Haldin could not be slightingly dismissed Razumov adopted the tone of hospitality, asking him to sit down and smoke.</p>
				<p>“Kirylo Sidorovitch,” said the other, flinging off his cap, “we are not perhaps in exactly the same camp. Your judgment is more philosophical. You are a man of few words, but I haven’t met anybody who dared to doubt the generosity of your sentiments. There is a solidity about your character which cannot exist without courage.”</p>
				<p>Razumov felt flattered and began to murmur shyly something about being very glad of his good opinion, when Haldin raised his hand.</p>
				<p>“That is what I was saying to myself,” he continued, “as I dodged in the woodyard down by the river-side. ‘He has a strong character this young man,’ I said to myself. ‘He does not throw his soul to the winds.’ Your reserve has always fascinated me, Kirylo Sidorovitch. So I tried to remember your address. But look here⁠—it was a piece of luck. Your dvornik was away from the gate talking to a sleigh-driver on the other side of the street. I met no one on the stairs, not a soul. As I came up to your floor I caught sight of your landlady coming out of your rooms. But she did not see me. She crossed the landing to her own side, and then I slipped in. I have been here two hours expecting you to come in every moment.”</p>
				<p>Razumov had listened in astonishment; but before he could open his mouth Haldin added, speaking deliberately, “It was I who removed de P⁠— this morning.” Razumov kept down a cry of dismay. The sentiment of his life being utterly ruined by this contact with such a crime expressed itself quaintly by a sort of half-derisive mental exclamation, “There goes my silver medal!”</p>
				<p>Haldin continued after waiting a while⁠—</p>
				<p>“You say nothing, Kirylo Sidorovitch! I understand your silence. To be sure, I cannot expect you with your frigid English manner to embrace me. But never mind your manners. You have enough heart to have heard the sound of weeping and gnashing of teeth this man raised in the land. That would be enough to get over any philosophical hopes. He was uprooting the tender plant. He had to be stopped. He was a dangerous man⁠—a convinced man. Three more years of his work would have put us back fifty years into bondage⁠—and look at all the lives wasted, at all the souls lost in that time.”</p>
				<p>His curt, self-confident voice suddenly lost its ring and it was in a dull tone that he added, “Yes, brother, I have killed him. It’s weary work.”</p>
				<p>Razumov had sunk into a chair. Every moment he expected a crowd of policemen to rush in. There must have been thousands of them out looking for that man walking up and down in his room. Haldin was talking again in a restrained, steady voice. Now and then he flourished an arm, slowly, without excitement.</p>
				<p>He told Razumov how he had brooded for a year; how he had not slept properly for weeks. He and “Another” had a warning of the Minister’s movements from “a certain person” late the evening before. He and that “Another” prepared their “engines” and resolved to have no sleep till “the deed” was done. They walked the streets under the falling snow with the “engines” on them, exchanging not a word the livelong night. When they happened to meet a police patrol they took each other by the arm and pretended to be a couple of peasants on the spree. They reeled and talked in drunken hoarse voices. Except for these strange outbreaks they kept silence, moving on ceaselessly. Their plans had been previously arranged. At daybreak they made their way to the spot which they knew the sledge must pass. When it appeared in sight they exchanged a muttered good-bye and separated. The “other” remained at the corner, Haldin took up a position a little farther up the street.⁠ ⁠…</p>
				<p>After throwing his “engine” he ran off and in a moment was overtaken by the panic-struck people flying away from the spot after the second explosion. They were wild with terror. He was jostled once or twice. He slowed down for the rush to pass him and then turned to the left into a narrow street. There he was alone.</p>
				<p>He marvelled at this immediate escape. The work was done. He could hardly believe it. He fought with an almost irresistible longing to lie down on the pavement and sleep. But this sort of faintness⁠—a drowsy faintness⁠—passed off quickly. He walked faster, making his way to one of the poorer parts of the town in order to look up Ziemianitch.</p>
				<p>This Ziemianitch, Razumov understood, was a sort of town-peasant who had got on; owner of a small number of sledges and horses for hire. Haldin paused in his narrative to exclaim⁠—</p>
				<p>“A bright spirit! A hardy soul! The best driver in St. Petersburg. He has a team of three horses there.⁠ ⁠… Ah! He’s a fellow!”</p>
				<p>This man had declared himself willing to take out safely, at any time, one or two persons to the second or third railway station on one of the southern lines. But there had been no time to warn him the night before. His usual haunt seemed to be a low-class eating-house on the outskirts of the town. When Haldin got there the man was not to be found. He was not expected to turn up again till the evening. Haldin wandered away restlessly.</p>
				<p>He saw the gate of a woodyard open and went in to get out of the wind which swept the bleak broad thoroughfare. The great rectangular piles of cut wood loaded with snow resembled the huts of a village. At first the watchman who discovered him crouching amongst them talked in a friendly manner. He was a dried-up old man wearing two ragged army coats one over the other; his wizened little face, tied up under the jaw and over the ears in a dirty red handkerchief, looked comical. Presently he grew sulky, and then all at once without rhyme or reason began to shout furiously.</p>
				<p>“Aren’t you ever going to clear out of this, you loafer? We know all about factory hands of your sort. A big, strong, young chap! You aren’t even drunk. What do you want here? You don’t frighten us. Take yourself and your ugly eyes away.”</p>
				<p>Haldin stopped before the sitting Razumov. His supple figure, with the white forehead above which the fair hair stood straight up, had an aspect of lofty daring.</p>
				<p>“He did not like my eyes,” he said. “And so⁠ ⁠… here I am.”</p>
				<p>Razumov made an effort to speak calmly.</p>
				<p>“But pardon me, Victor Victorovitch. We know each other so little.⁠ ⁠… I don’t see why you.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
				<p>“Confidence,” said Haldin.</p>
				<p>This word sealed Razumov’s lips as if a hand had been clapped on his mouth. His brain seethed with arguments.</p>
				<p>“And so⁠—here you are,” he muttered through his teeth.</p>
				<p>The other did not detect the tone of anger. Never suspected it.</p>
				<p>“Yes. And nobody knows I am here. You are the last person that could be suspected⁠—should I get caught. That’s an advantage, you see. And then⁠—speaking to a superior mind like yours I can well say all the truth. It occurred to me that you⁠—you have no one belonging to you⁠—no ties, no one to suffer for it if this came out by some means. There have been enough ruined Russian homes as it is. But I don’t see how my passage through your rooms can be ever known. If I should be got hold of, I’ll know how to keep silent⁠—no matter what they may be pleased to do to me,” he added grimly.</p>
				<p>He began to walk again while Razumov sat still appalled.</p>
				<p>“You thought that⁠—” he faltered out almost sick with indignation.</p>
				<p>“Yes, Razumov. Yes, brother. Some day you shall help to build. You suppose that I am a terrorist, now⁠—a destructor of what is, But consider that the true destroyers are they who destroy the spirit of progress and truth, not the avengers who merely kill the bodies of the persecutors of human dignity. Men like me are necessary to make room for self-contained, thinking men like you. Well, we have made the sacrifice of our lives, but all the same I want to escape if it can be done. It is not my life I want to save, but my power to do. I won’t live idle. Oh no! Don’t make any mistake, Razumov. Men like me are rare. And, besides, an example like this is more awful to oppressors when the perpetrator vanishes without a trace. They sit in their offices and palaces and quake. All I want you to do is to help me to vanish. No great matter that. Only to go by and by and see Ziemianitch for me at that place where I went this morning. Just tell him, ‘He whom you know wants a well-horsed sledge to pull up half an hour after midnight at the seventh lamp-post on the left counting from the upper end of Karabelnaya. If nobody gets in, the sledge is to run round a block or two, so as to come back past the same spot in ten minutes’ time.’ ”</p>
				<p>Razumov wondered why he had not cut short that talk and told this man to go away long before. Was it weakness or what?</p>
				<p>He concluded that it was a sound instinct. Haldin must have been seen. It was impossible that some people should not have noticed the face and appearance of the man who threw the second bomb. Haldin was a noticeable person. The police in their thousands must have had his description within the hour. With every moment the danger grew. Sent out to wander in the streets he could not escape being caught in the end.</p>
				<p>The police would very soon find out all about him. They would set about discovering a conspiracy. Everybody Haldin had ever known would be in the greatest danger. Unguarded expressions, little facts in themselves innocent would be counted for crimes. Razumov remembered certain words he said, the speeches he had listened to, the harmless gatherings he had attended⁠—it was almost impossible for a student to keep out of that sort of thing, without becoming suspect to his comrades.</p>
				<p>Razumov saw himself shut up in a fortress, worried, badgered, perhaps ill-used. He saw himself deported by an administrative order, his life broken, ruined, and robbed of all hope. He saw himself⁠—at best⁠—leading a miserable existence under police supervision, in some small, faraway provincial town, without friends to assist his necessities or even take any steps to alleviate his lot⁠—as others had. Others had fathers, mothers, brothers, relations, connexions, to move heaven and earth on their behalf⁠—he had no one. The very officials that sentenced him some morning would forget his existence before sunset.</p>
				<p>He saw his youth pass away from him in misery and half starvation⁠—his strength give way, his mind become an abject thing. He saw himself creeping, broken down and shabby, about the streets⁠—dying unattended in some filthy hole of a room, or on the sordid bed of a Government hospital.</p>
				<p>He shuddered. Then the peace of bitter calmness came over him. It was best to keep this man out of the streets till he could be got rid of with some chance of escaping. That was the best that could be done. Razumov, of course, felt the safety of his lonely existence to be permanently endangered. This evening’s doings could turn up against him at any time as long as this man lived and the present institutions endured. They appeared to him rational and indestructible at that moment. They had a force of harmony⁠—in contrast with the horrible discord of this man’s presence. He hated the man. He said quietly⁠—</p>
				<p>“Yes, of course, I will go. ‘You must give me precise directions, and for the rest⁠—depend on me.”</p>
				<p>“Ah! You are a fellow! Collected⁠—cool as a cucumber. A regular Englishman. Where did you get your soul from? There aren’t many like you. Look here, brother! Men like me leave no posterity, but their souls are not lost. No man’s soul is ever lost. It works for itself⁠—or else where would be the sense of self-sacrifice, of martyrdom, of conviction, of faith⁠—the labours of the soul? What will become of my soul when I die in the way I must die⁠—soon⁠—very soon perhaps? It shall not perish. Don’t make a mistake, Razumov. This is not murder⁠—it is war, war. My spirit shall go on warring in some Russian body till all falsehood is swept out of the world. The modern civilization is false, but a new revelation shall come out of Russia. Ha! you say nothing. You are a sceptic. I respect your philosophical scepticism, Razumov, but don’t touch the soul. The Russian soul that lives in all of us. It has a future. It has a mission, I tell you, or else why should I have been moved to do this⁠—reckless⁠—like a butcher⁠—in the middle of all these innocent people⁠—scattering death⁠—I! I!⁠ ⁠… I wouldn’t hurt a fly!”</p>
				<p>“Not so loud,” warned Razumov harshly.</p>
				<p>Haldin sat down abruptly, and leaning his head on his folded arms burst into tears. He wept for a long time. The dusk had deepened in the room. Razumov, motionless in sombre wonder, listened to the sobs.</p>
				<p>The other raised his head, got up and with an effort mastered his voice.</p>
				<p>“Yes. Men like me leave no posterity,” he repeated in a subdued tone, “I have a sister though. She’s with my old mother⁠—I persuaded them to go abroad this year⁠—thank God. Not a bad little girl my sister. She has the most trustful eyes of any human being that ever walked this earth. She will marry well, I hope. She may have children⁠—sons perhaps. Look at me. My father was a Government official in the provinces, He had a little land too. A simple servant of God⁠—a true Russian in his way. His was the soul of obedience. But I am not like him. They say I resemble my mother’s eldest brother, an officer. They shot him in ’28. Under Nicholas, you know. Haven’t I told you that this is war, war.⁠ ⁠… But God of Justice! This is weary work.”</p>
				<p>Razumov, in his chair, leaning his head on his hand, spoke as if from the bottom of an abyss.</p>
				<p>“You believe in God, Haldin?”</p>
				<p>“There you go catching at words that are wrung from one. What does it matter? What was it the Englishman said: ‘There is a divine soul in things⁠ ⁠…’ Devil take him⁠—I don’t remember now. But he spoke the truth. When the day of you thinkers comes don’t you forget what’s divine in the Russian soul⁠—and that’s resignation. Respect that in your intellectual restlessness and don’t let your arrogant wisdom spoil its message to the world. I am speaking to you now like a man with a rope round his neck. What do you imagine I am? A being in revolt? No. It’s you thinkers who are in everlasting revolt. I am one of the resigned. When the necessity of this heavy work came to me and I understood that it had to be done⁠—what did I do? Did I exult? Did I take pride in my purpose? Did I try to weigh its worth and consequences? No! I was resigned. I thought ‘God’s will be done.’ ”</p>
				<p>He threw himself full length on Razumov’s bed and putting the backs of his hands over his eyes remained perfectly motionless and silent. Not even the sound of his breathing could be heard. The dead stillness or the room remained undisturbed till in the darkness Razumov said gloomily⁠—</p>
				<p>“Haldin.”</p>
				<p>“Yes,” answered the other readily, quite invisible now on the bed and without the slightest stir.</p>
				<p>“Isn’t it time for me to start?”</p>
				<p>“Yes, brother.” The other was heard, lying still in the darkness as though he were talking in his sleep. “The time has come to put fate to the test.”</p>
				<p>He paused, then gave a few lucid directions in the quiet impersonal voice of a man in a trance. Razumov made ready without a word of answer. As he was leaving the room the voice on the bed said after him⁠—</p>
				<p>“Go with God, thou silent soul.”</p>
				<p>On the landing, moving softly, Razumov locked the door and put the key in his pocket.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-1-2" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</h3>
				<p>The words and events of that evening must have been graven as if with a steel tool on Mr. Razumov’s brain since he was able to write his relation with such fullness and precision a good many months afterwards.</p>
				<p>The record of the thoughts which assailed him in the street is even more minute and abundant. They seem to have rushed upon him with the greater freedom because his thinking powers were no longer crushed by Haldin’s presence⁠—the appalling presence of a great crime and the stunning force of a great fanaticism. On looking through the pages of Mr. Razumov’s diary I own that a “rush of thoughts” is not an adequate image.</p>
				<p>The more adequate description would be a tumult of thoughts⁠—the faithful reflection of the state of his feelings. The thoughts in themselves were not numerous⁠—they were like the thoughts of most human beings, few and simple⁠—but they cannot be reproduced here in all their exclamatory repetitions which went on in an endless and weary turmoil⁠—for the walk was long.</p>
				<p>If to the Western reader they appear shocking, inappropriate, or even improper, it must be remembered that as to the first this may be the effect of my crude statement. For the rest I will only remark here that this is not a story of the West of Europe.</p>
				<p>Nations it may be have fashioned their Governments, but the Governments have paid them back in the same coin. It is unthinkable that any young Englishman should find himself in Razumov’s situation. This being so it would be a vain enterprise to imagine what he would think. The only safe surmise to make is that he would not think as Mr. Razumov thought at this crisis of his fate. He would not have an hereditary and personal knowledge or the means by which historical autocracy represses ideas, guards its power, and defends its existence. By an act of mental extravagance he might imagine himself arbitrarily thrown into prison, but it would never occur to him unless he were delirious (and perhaps not even then) that he could be beaten with whips as a practical measure either of investigation or of punishment.</p>
				<p>This is but a crude and obvious example of the different conditions of Western thought. I don’t know that this danger occurred, specially, to Mr. Razumov. No doubt it entered unconsciously into the general dread and the general appallingness of this crisis. Razumov, as has been seen, was aware of more subtle ways in which an individual may be undone by the proceedings of a despotic Government. A simple expulsion from the University (the very least that could happen to him), with an impossibility to continue his studies anywhere, was enough to ruin utterly a young man depending entirely upon the development of his natural abilities for his place in the world. He was a Russian: and for him to be implicated meant simply sinking into the lowest social depths amongst the hopeless and the destitute⁠—the night birds of the city.</p>
				<p>The peculiar circumstances of Razumov’s parentage, or rather of his lack of parentage, should be taken into the account of his thoughts. And he remembered them too. He had been lately reminded of them in a peculiarly atrocious way by this fatal Haldin. “Because I haven’t that, must everything else be taken away from me?” he thought.</p>
				<p>He nerved himself for another effort to go on. Along the roadway sledges glided phantom-like and jingling through a fluttering whiteness on the black face of the night. “For it is a crime,” he was saying to himself. “A murder is a murder. Though, of course, some sort of liberal institutions.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
				<p>A feeling of horrible sickness came over him. “I must be courageous,” he exhorted himself mentally. All his strength was suddenly gone as if taken out by a hand. Then by a mighty effort of will it came back because he was afraid of fainting in the street and being picked up by the police with the key of his lodgings in his pocket. They would find Haldin there, and then, indeed, he would be undone.</p>
				<p>Strangely enough it was this fear which seems to have kept him up to the end. The passers-by were rare. They came upon him suddenly, looming up black in the snowflakes close by, then vanishing all at once-without footfalls.</p>
				<p>It was the quarter of the very poor. Razumov noticed an elderly woman tied up in ragged shawls. Under the street lamp she seemed a beggar off duty. She walked leisurely in the blizzard as though she had no home to hurry to, she hugged under one arm a round loaf of black bread with an air of guarding a priceless booty: and Razumov averting his glance envied her the peace of her mind and the serenity of her fate.</p>
				<p>To one reading Mr. Razumov’s narrative it is really a wonder how he managed to keep going as he did along one interminable street after another on pavements that were gradually becoming blocked with snow. It was the thought of Haldin locked up in his rooms and the desperate desire to get rid of his presence which drove him forward. No rational determination had any part in his exertions. Thus, when on arriving at the low eating-house he heard that the man of horses, Ziemianitch, was not there, he could only stare stupidly.</p>
				<p>The waiter, a wild-haired youth in tarred boots and a pink shirt, exclaimed, uncovering his pale gums in a silly grin, that Ziemianitch had got his skinful early in the afternoon and had gone away with a bottle under each arm to keep it up amongst the horses⁠—he supposed.</p>
				<p>The owner of the vile den, a bony short man in a dirty cloth caftan coming down to his heels, stood by, his hands tucked into his belt, and nodded confirmation.</p>
				<p>The reek of spirits, the greasy rancid steam of food got Razumov by the throat. He struck a table with his clenched hand and shouted violently⁠—</p>
				<p>“You lie.”</p>
				<p>Bleary unwashed faces were turned to his direction. A mild-eyed ragged tramp drinking tea at the next table moved farther away. A murmur of wonder arose with an undertone of uneasiness. A laugh was heard too, and an exclamation, “There! there!” jeeringly soothing. The waiter looked all round and announced to the room⁠—</p>
				<p>“The gentleman won’t believe that Ziemianitch is drunk.”</p>
				<p>From a distant corner a hoarse voice belonging to a horrible, nondescript, shaggy being with a black face like the muzzle of a bear grunted angrily⁠—</p>
				<p>“The cursed driver of thieves. What do we want with his gentlemen here? We are all honest folk in this place.”</p>
				<p>Razumov, biting his lip till blood came to keep himself from bursting into imprecations, followed the owner of the den, who, whispering “Come along, little father,” led him into a tiny hole of a place behind the wooden counter, whence proceeded a sound of splashing. A wet and bedraggled creature, a sort of sexless and shivering scarecrow, washed glasses in there, bending over a wooden tub by the light of a tallow dip.</p>
				<p>“Yes, little father,” the man in the long caftan said plaintively. He had a brown, cunning little face, a thin greyish beard. Trying to light a tin lantern he hugged it to his breast and talked garrulously the while.</p>
				<p>He would show Ziemianitch to the gentleman to prove there were no lies told. And he would show him drunk. His woman, it seems, ran away from him last night. “Such a hag she was! Thin! Pfui!” He spat. They were always running away from that driver of the devil⁠—and he sixty years old too; could never get used to it. But each heart knows sorrow after its own kind and Ziemianitch was a born fool all his days. And then he would fly to the bottle. “ ‘Who could bear life in our land without the bottle?’ he says. A proper Russian man⁠—the little pig.⁠ ⁠… Be pleased to follow me.”</p>
				<p>Razumov crossed a quadrangle of deep snow enclosed between high walls with innumerable windows. Here and there a dim yellow light hung within the four-square mass of darkness. The house was an enormous slum, a hive of human vermin, a monumental abode of misery towering on the verge of starvation and despair.</p>
				<p>In a corner the ground sloped sharply down, and Razumov followed the light of the lantern through a small doorway into a long cavernous place like a neglected subterranean byre. Deep within, three shaggy little horses tied up to rings hung their heads together, motionless and shadowy in the dim light of the lantern. It must have been the famous team of Haldin’s escape. Razumov peered fearfully into the gloom. His guide pawed in the straw with his foot.</p>
				<p>“Here he is. Ah! the little pigeon. A true Russian man. ‘No heavy hearts for me,’ he says. ‘Bring out the bottle and take your ugly mug out of my sight.’ Ha! ha! ha! That’s the fellow he is.”</p>
				<p>He held the lantern over a prone form of a man, apparently fully dressed for outdoors. His head was lost in a pointed cloth hood. On the other side of a heap of straw protruded a pair of feet in monstrous thick boots.</p>
				<p>“Always ready to drive,” commented the keeper of the eating-house. “A proper Russian driver that. Saint or devil, night or day is all one to Ziemianitch when his heart is free from sorrow. ‘I don’t ask who you are, but where you want to go,’ he says. He would drive Satan himself to his own abode and come back chirruping to his horses. Many a one he has driven who is clanking his chains in the Nertchinsk mines by this time.”</p>
				<p>Razumov shuddered.</p>
				<p>“Call him, wake him up,” he faltered out.</p>
				<p>The other set down his light, stepped back and launched a kick at the prostrate sleeper. The man shook at the impact but did not move. At the third kick he grunted but remained inert as before.</p>
				<p>The eating-house keeper desisted and fetched a deep sigh.</p>
				<p>“You see for yourself how it is. We have done what we can for you.”</p>
				<p>He picked up the lantern. The intense black spokes of shadow swung about in the circle of light. A terrible fury⁠—the blind rage of self-preservation⁠—possessed Razumov.</p>
				<p>“Ah! The vile beast,” he bellowed out in an unearthly tone which made the lantern jump and tremble! “I shall wake you! Give me⁠ ⁠… give me⁠ ⁠…”</p>
				<p>He looked round wildly, seized the handle of a stablefork and rushing forward struck at the prostrate body with inarticulate cries. After a time his cries ceased, and the rain of blows fell in the stillness and shadows of the cellar-like stable. Razumov belaboured Ziemianitch with an insatiable fury, in great volleys of sounding thwacks. Except for the violent movements of Razumov nothing stirred, neither the beaten man nor the spoke-like shadows on the walls. And only the sound of blows was heard. It was a weird scene.</p>
				<p>Suddenly there was a sharp crack. The stick broke and half of it flew far away into the gloom beyond the light. At the same time Ziemianitch sat up. At this Razumov became as motionless as the man with the lantern⁠—only his breast heaved for air as if ready to burst.</p>
				<p>Some dull sensation of pain must have penetrated at last the consoling night of drunkenness enwrapping the “bright Russian soul” of Haldin’s enthusiastic praise. But Ziemianitch evidently saw nothing. His eyeballs blinked all white in the light once, twice⁠—then the gleam went out. For a moment he sat in the straw with closed eyes with a strange air of weary meditation, then fell over slowly on his side without making the slightest sound. Only the straw rustled a little. Razumov stared wildly, fighting for his breath. After a second or two he heard a light snore.</p>
				<p>He flung from him the piece of stick remaining in his grasp, and went off with great hasty strides without looking back once.</p>
				<p>After going heedlessly for some fifty yards along the street he walked into a snowdrift and was up to his knees before he stopped.</p>
				<p>This recalled him to himself; and glancing about he discovered he had been going in the wrong direction. He retraced his steps, but now at a more moderate pace. When passing before the house he had just left he flourished his fist at the sombre refuge of misery and crime rearing its sinister bulk on the white ground. It had an air of brooding. He let his arm fall by his side⁠—discouraged.</p>
				<p>Ziemianitch’s passionate surrender to sorrow and consolation had baffled him. That was the people. A true Russian man! Razumov was glad he had beaten that brute⁠—the “bright soul” of the other. Here they were: the people and the enthusiast.</p>
				<p>Between the two he was done for. Between the drunkenness of the peasant incapable of action and the dream-intoxication of the idealist incapable of perceiving the reason of things, and the true character of men. It was a sort of terrible childishness. But children had their masters. “Ah! the stick, the stick, the stern hand,” thought Razumov, longing for power to hurt and destroy.</p>
				<p>He was glad he had thrashed that brute. The physical exertion had left his body in a comfortable glow. His mental agitation too was clarified as if all the feverishness had gone out of him in a fit of outward violence. Together with the persisting sense of terrible danger he was conscious now of a tranquil, unquenchable hate.</p>
				<p>He walked slower and slower. And indeed, considering the guest he had in his rooms, it was no wonder he lingered on the way. It was like harbouring a pestilential disease that would not perhaps take your life, but would take from you all that made life worth living⁠—a subtle pest that would convert earth into a hell.</p>
				<p>What was he doing now? Lying on the bed as if dead, with the back of his hands over his eyes? Razumov had a morbidly vivid vision of Haldin on his bed⁠—the white pillow hollowed by the head, the legs in long boots, the upturned feet. And in his abhorrence he said to himself, “I’ll kill him when I get home.” But he knew very well that that was of no use. The corpse hanging round his neck would be nearly as fatal as the living man. Nothing short of complete annihilation would do. And that was impossible. What then? Must one kill oneself to escape this visitation?</p>
				<p>Razumov’s despair was too profoundly tinged with hate to accept that issue.</p>
				<p>And yet it was despair⁠—nothing less⁠—at the thought of having to live with Haldin for an indefinite number of days in mortal alarm at every sound. But perhaps when he heard that this “bright soul” of Ziemianitch suffered from a drunken eclipse the fellow would take his infernal resignation somewhere else. And that was not likely on the face of it.</p>
				<p>Razumov thought: “I am being crushed⁠—and I can’t even run away.” Other men had somewhere a corner of the earth⁠—some little house in the provinces where they had a right to take their troubles. A material refuge. He had nothing. He had not even a moral refuge⁠—the refuge of confidence. To whom could he go with this tale⁠—in all this great, great land?</p>
				<p>Razumov stamped his foot⁠—and under the soft carpet of snow felt the hard ground of Russia, inanimate, cold, inert, like a sullen and tragic mother hiding her face under a winding-sheet⁠—his native soil!⁠—his very own⁠—without a fireside, without a heart!</p>
				<p>He cast his eyes upwards and stood amazed. The snow had ceased to fall, and now, as if by a miracle, he saw above his head the clear black sky of the northern winter, decorated with the sumptuous fires of the stars. It was a canopy fit for the resplendent purity of the snows.</p>
				<p>Razumov received an almost physical impression of endless space and of countless millions.</p>
				<p>He responded to it with the readiness of a Russian who is born to an inheritance of space and numbers. Under the sumptuous immensity of the sky, the snow covered the endless forests, the frozen rivers, the plains of an immense country, obliterating the landmarks, the accidents of the ground, levelling everything under its uniform whiteness, like a monstrous blank page awaiting the record of an inconceivable history. It covered the passive land with its lives of countless people like Ziemianitch and its handful of agitators like this Haldin⁠—murdering foolishly.</p>
				<p>It was a sort of sacred inertia. Razumov felt a respect for it. A voice seemed to cry within him, “Don’t touch it.” It was a guarantee of duration, of safety, while the travail of maturing destiny went on⁠—a work not of revolutions with their passionate levity of action and their shifting impulses⁠—but of peace. What it needed was not the conflicting aspirations of a people, but a will strong and one: it wanted not the babble of many voices, but a man⁠—strong and one!</p>
				<p>Razumov stood on the point of conversion. He was fascinated by its approach, by its overpowering logic. For a train of thought is never false. The falsehood lies deep in the necessities of existence, in secret fears and half-formed ambitions, in the secret confidence combined with a secret mistrust of ourselves, in the love of hope and the dread of uncertain days.</p>
				<p>In Russia, the land of spectral ideas and disembodied aspirations, many brave minds have turned away at last from the vain and endless conflict to the one great historical fact of the land. They turned to autocracy for the peace of their patriotic conscience as a weary unbeliever, touched by grace, turns to the faith of his fathers for the blessing of spiritual rest. Like other Russians before him, Razumov, in conflict with himself, felt the touch of grace upon his forehead.</p>
				<p>“Haldin means disruption,” he thought to himself, beginning to walk again. “What is he with his indignation, with his talk of bondage⁠—with his talk of God’s justice? All that means disruption. Better that thousands should suffer than that a people should become a disintegrated mass, helpless like dust in the wind. Obscurantism is better than the light of incendiary torches. The seed germinates in the night. Out of the dark soil springs the perfect plant. But a volcanic eruption is sterile, the ruin of the fertile ground. And am I, who love my country⁠—who have nothing but that to love and put my faith in⁠—am I to have my future, perhaps my usefulness, ruined by this sanguinary fanatic?”</p>
				<p>The grace entered into Razumov. He believed now in the man who would come at the appointed time.</p>
				<p>What is a throne? A few pieces of wood upholstered in velvet. But a throne is a seat of power too. The form of government is the shape of a tool⁠—an instrument. But twenty thousand bladders inflated by the noblest sentiments and jostling against each other in the air are a miserable incumbrance of space, holding no power, possessing no will, having nothing to give.</p>
				<p>He went on thus, heedless of the way, holding a discourse with himself with extraordinary abundance and facility. Generally his phrases came to him slowly, after a conscious and painstaking wooing. Some superior power had inspired him with a flow of masterly argument as certain converted sinners become overwhelmingly loquacious.</p>
				<p>He felt an austere exultation.</p>
				<p>“What are the luridly smoky lucubrations of that fellow to the clear grasp of my intellect?” he thought. “Is not this my country? Have I not got forty million brothers?” he asked himself, unanswerably victorious in the silence of his breast. And the fearful thrashing he had given the inanimate Ziemianitch seemed to him a sign of intimate union, a pathetically severe necessity of brotherly love. “No! If I must suffer let me at least suffer for my convictions, not for a crime my reason⁠—my cool superior reason⁠—rejects.”</p>
				<p>He ceased to think for a moment. The silence in his breast was complete. But he felt a suspicious uneasiness, such as we may experience when we enter an unlighted strange place⁠—the irrational feeling that something may jump upon us in the dark⁠—the absurd dread of the unseen.</p>
				<p>Of course he was far from being a moss-grown reactionary. Everything was not for the best. Despotic bureaucracy⁠ ⁠… abuses⁠ ⁠… corruption⁠ ⁠… and so on. Capable men were wanted. Enlightened intelligences. Devoted hearts. But absolute power should be preserved⁠—the tool ready for the man⁠—for the great autocrat of the future. Razumov believed in him. The logic of history made him unavoidable. The state of the people demanded him, “What else?” he asked himself ardently, “could move all that mass in one direction? Nothing could. Nothing but a single will.”</p>
				<p>He was persuaded that he was sacrificing his personal longings of liberalism⁠—rejecting the attractive error for the stern Russian truth. “That’s patriotism,” he observed mentally, and added, “There’s no stopping midway on that road,” and then remarked to himself, “I am not a coward.”</p>
				<p>And again there was a dead silence in Razumov’s breast. He walked with lowered head, making room for no one. He walked slowly and his thoughts returning spoke within him with solemn slowness.</p>
				<p>“What is this Haldin? And what am I? Only two grains of sand. But a great mountain is made up of just such insignificant grains. And the death of a man or of many men is an insignificant thing. Yet we combat a contagious pestilence. Do I want his death? No! I would save him if I could⁠—but no one can do that⁠—he is the withered member which must be cut off. If I must perish through him, let me at least not perish with him, and associated against my will with his sombre folly that understands nothing either of men or things. Why should I leave a false memory?”</p>
				<p>It passed through his mind that there was no one in the world who cared what sort of memory he left behind him. He exclaimed to himself instantly, “Perish vainly for a falsehood!⁠ ⁠… What a miserable fate!”</p>
				<p>He was now in a more animated part of the town. He did not remark the crash of two colliding sledges close to the curb. The driver of one bellowed tearfully at his fellow⁠—</p>
				<p>“Oh, thou vile wretch!”</p>
				<p>This hoarse yell, let out nearly in his ear, disturbed Razumov. He shook his head impatiently and went on looking straight before him. Suddenly on the snow, stretched on his back right across his path, he saw Haldin, solid, distinct, real, with his inverted hands over his eyes, clad in a brown close-fitting coat and long boots. He was lying out of the way a little, as though he had selected that place on purpose. The snow round him was untrodden.</p>
				<p>This hallucination had such a solidity of aspect that the first movement of Razumov was to reach for his pocket to assure himself that the key of his rooms was there. But he checked the impulse with a disdainful curve of his lips. He understood. His thought, concentrated intensely on the figure left lying on his bed, had culminated in this extraordinary illusion of the sight. Razumov tackled the phenomenon calmly. With a stern face, without a check and gazing far beyond the vision, he walked on, experiencing nothing but a slight tightening of the chest. After passing he turned his head for a glance, and saw only the unbroken track of his footsteps over the place where the breast of the phantom had been lying.</p>
				<p>Razumov walked on and after a little time whispered his wonder to himself.</p>
				<p>“Exactly as if alive! Seemed to breathe! And right in my way too! I have had an extraordinary experience.”</p>
				<p>He made a few steps and muttered through his set teeth⁠—</p>
				<p>“I shall give him up.”</p>
				<p>Then for some twenty yards or more all was blank. He wrapped his cloak closer round him. He pulled his cap well forward over his eyes.</p>
				<p>“Betray. A great word. What is betrayal? They talk of a man betraying his country, his friends, his sweetheart. There must be a moral bond first. All a man can betray is his conscience. And how is my conscience engaged here; by what bond of common faith, of common conviction, am I obliged to let that fanatical idiot drag me down with him? On the contrary⁠—every obligation of true courage is the other way.”</p>
				<p>Razumov looked round from under his cap.</p>
				<p>“What can the prejudice of the world reproach me with? Have I provoked his confidence? No! Have I by a single word, look, or gesture given him reason to suppose that I accepted his trust in me? No! It is true that I consented to go and see his Ziemianitch. Well, I have been to see him. And I broke a stick on his back too⁠—the brute.”</p>
				<p>Something seemed to turn over in his head bringing uppermost a singularly hard, clear facet of his brain.</p>
				<p>“It would be better, however,” he reflected with a quite different mental accent, “to keep that circumstance altogether to myself.”</p>
				<p>He had passed beyond the turn leading to his lodgings, and had reached a wide and fashionable street. Some shops were still open, and all the restaurants. Lights fell on the pavement where men in expensive fur coats, with here and there the elegant figure of a woman, walked with an air of leisure. Razumov looked at them with the contempt of an austere believer for the frivolous crowd. It was the world⁠—those officers, dignitaries, men of fashion, officials, members of the Yacht Club. The event of the morning affected them all. What would they say if they knew what this student in a cloak was going to do?</p>
				<p>“Not one of them is capable of feeling and thinking as deeply as I can. How many of them could accomplish an act of conscience?”</p>
				<p>Razumov lingered in the well-lighted street. He was firmly decided. Indeed, it could hardly be called a decision. He had simply discovered what he had meant to do all along. And yet he felt the need of some other mind’s sanction.</p>
				<p>With something resembling anguish he said to himself⁠—</p>
				<p>“I want to be understood.” The universal aspiration with all its profound and melancholy meaning assailed heavily Razumov, who, amongst eighty millions of his kith and kin, had no heart to which he could open himself.</p>
				<p>The attorney was not to be thought of. He despised the little agent of chicane too much. One could not go and lay one’s conscience before the policeman at the corner. Neither was Razumov anxious to go to the chief of his district’s police⁠—a common-looking person whom he used to see sometimes in the street in a shabby uniform and with a smouldering cigarette stuck to his lower lip. “He would begin by locking me up most probably. At any rate, he is certain to get excited and create an awful commotion,” thought Razumov practically.</p>
				<p>An act of conscience must be done with outward dignity.</p>
				<p>Razumov longed desperately for a word of advice, for moral support. Who knows what true loneliness is⁠—not the conventional word, but the naked terror? To the lonely themselves it wears a mask. The most miserable outcast hugs some memory or some illusion. Now and then a fatal conjunction of events may lift the veil for an instant. For an instant only. No human being could bear a steady view of moral solitude without going mad.</p>
				<p>Razumov had reached that point of vision. To escape from it he embraced for a whole minute the delirious purpose of rushing to his lodgings and flinging himself on his knees by the side of the bed with the dark figure stretched on it; to pour out a full confession in passionate words that would stir the whole being of that man to its innermost depths; that would end in embraces and tears; in an incredible fellowship of souls⁠—such as the world had never seen. It was sublime!</p>
				<p>Inwardly he wept and trembled already. But to the casual eyes that were cast upon him he was aware that he appeared as a tranquil student in a cloak, out for a leisurely stroll. He noted, too, the sidelong, brilliant glance of a pretty woman⁠—with a delicate head, and covered in the hairy skins of wild beasts down to her feet, like a frail and beautiful savage⁠—which rested for a moment with a sort of mocking tenderness on the deep abstraction of that good-looking young man.</p>
				<p>Suddenly Razumov stood still. The glimpse of a passing grey whisker, caught and lost in the same instant, had evoked the complete image of Prince K⁠—, the man who once had pressed his hand as no other man had pressed it⁠—a faint but lingering pressure like a secret sign, like a half-unwilling caress.</p>
				<p>And Razumov marvelled at himself. Why did he not think of him before!</p>
				<p>“A senator, a dignitary, a great personage, the very man⁠—He!”</p>
				<p>A strange softening emotion came over Razumov⁠—made his knees shake a little. He repressed it with a new-born austerity. All that sentiment was pernicious nonsense. He couldn’t be quick enough; and when he got into a sledge he shouted to the driver⁠—“to the K⁠— Palace. Get on⁠—you! Fly!” The startled moujik, bearded up to the very whites of his eyes, answered obsequiously⁠—</p>
				<p>“I hear, your high Nobility.”</p>
				<p>It was lucky for Razumov that Prince K⁠— was not a man of timid character. On the day of Mr. de P⁠—’s murder an extreme alarm and despondency prevailed in the high official spheres.</p>
				<p>Prince K⁠—, sitting sadly alone in his study, was told by his alarmed servants that a mysterious young man had forced his way into the hall, refused to tell his name and the nature of his business, and would not move from there till he had seen his Excellency in private. Instead of locking himself up and telephoning for the police, as nine out of ten high personages would have done that evening, the Prince gave way to curiosity and came quietly to the door of his study.</p>
				<p>In the hall, the front door standing wide open, he recognised at once Razumov, pale as death, his eyes blazing, and surrounded by perplexed lackeys.</p>
				<p>The Prince was vexed beyond measure, and even indignant. But his humane instincts and a subtle sense of self-respect could not allow him to let this young man be thrown out into the street by base menials. He retreated unseen into his room, and after a little rang his bell. Razumov heard in the hall an ominously raised harsh voice saying somewhere far away⁠—</p>
				<p>“Show the gentleman in here.”</p>
				<p>Razumov walked in without a tremor. He felt himself invulnerable⁠—raised far above the shallowness of common judgment. Though he saw the Prince looking at him with black displeasure, the lucidity of his mind, of which he was very conscious, gave him an extraordinary assurance. He was not asked to sit down.</p>
				<p>Half an hour later they appeared in the hall together. The lackeys stood up, and the Prince, moving with difficulty on his gouty feet, was helped into his furs. The carriage had been ordered before. When the great double door was flung open with a crash, Razumov, who had been standing silent with a lost gaze but with every faculty intensely on the alert, heard the Prince’s voice⁠—</p>
				<p>“Your arm, young man.”</p>
				<p>The mobile, superficial mind of the ex-Guards officer, man of showy missions, experienced in nothing but the arts of gallant intrigue and worldly success, had been equally impressed by the more obvious difficulties of such a situation and by Razumov’s quiet dignity in stating them.</p>
				<p>He had said, “No. Upon the whole I can’t condemn the step you ventured to take by coming to me with your story. It is not an affair for police understrappers. The greatest importance is attached to.⁠ ⁠… Set your mind at rest. I shall see you through this most extraordinary and difficult situation.”</p>
				<p>Then the Prince rose to ring the bell, and Razumov, making a short bow, had said with deference⁠—</p>
				<p>“I have trusted my instinct. A young man having no claim upon anybody in the world has in an hour of trial involving his deepest political convictions turned to an illustrious Russian⁠—that’s all.”</p>
				<p>The Prince had exclaimed hastily⁠—</p>
				<p>“You have done well.”</p>
				<p>In the carriage⁠—it was a small brougham on sleigh runners⁠—Razumov broke the silence in a voice that trembled slightly.</p>
				<p>“My gratitude surpasses the greatness of my presumption.”</p>
				<p>He gasped, feeling unexpectedly in the dark a momentary pressure on his arm.</p>
				<p>“You have done well,” repeated the Prince.</p>
				<p>When the carriage stopped the Prince murmured to Razumov, who had never ventured a single question⁠—</p>
				<p>“The house of General T⁠—.”</p>
				<p>In the middle of the snow-covered roadway blazed a great bonfire. Some Cossacks, the bridles of their horses over the arm, were warming themselves around. Two sentries stood at the door, several gendarmes lounged under the great carriage gateway, and on the first-floor landing two orderlies rose and stood at attention. Razumov walked at the Prince’s elbow.</p>
				<p>A surprising quantity of hot-house plants in pots cumbered the floor of the ante-room. Servants came forward. A young man in civilian clothes arrived hurriedly, was whispered to, bowed low, and exclaiming zealously, “Certainly⁠—this minute,” fled within somewhere. The Prince signed to Razumov.</p>
				<p>They passed through a suite of reception-rooms all barely lit and one of them prepared for dancing. The wife of the General had put off her party. An atmosphere of consternation pervaded the place. But the General’s own room, with heavy sombre hangings, two massive desks, and deep armchairs, had all the lights turned on. The footman shut the door behind them and they waited.</p>
				<p>There was a coal fire in an English grate; Razumov had never before seen such a fire; and the silence of the room was like the silence of the grave; perfect, measureless, for even the clock on the mantelpiece made no sound. Filling a corner, on a black pedestal, stood a quarter-life-size smooth-limbed bronze of an adolescent figure, running. The Prince observed in an undertone⁠—</p>
				<p>“Spontini’s. ‘Flight of Youth.’ Exquisite.”</p>
				<p>“Admirable,” assented Razumov faintly.</p>
				<p>They said nothing more after this, the Prince silent with his grand air, Razumov staring at the statue. He was worried by a sensation resembling the gnawing of hunger.</p>
				<p>He did not turn when he heard an inner door fly open, and a quick footstep, muffled on the carpet.</p>
				<p>The Prince’s voice immediately exclaimed, thick with excitement⁠—</p>
				<p>“We have got him⁠—<i>ce miserable</i>. A worthy young man came to me⁠—No! It’s incredible.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
				<p>Razumov held his breath before the bronze as if expecting a crash. Behind his back a voice he had never heard before insisted politely⁠—</p>
				<p>“<i>Asseyez-vous donc</i>.”</p>
				<p>The Prince almost shrieked, “<i>Mais comprenez-vous, mon cher! L’assassin</i>! the murderer⁠—we have got him.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
				<p>Razumov spun round. The General’s smooth big cheeks rested on the stiff collar of his uniform. He must have been already looking at Razumov, because that last saw the pale blue eyes fastened on him coldly.</p>
				<p>The Prince from a chair waved an impressive hand.</p>
				<p>“This is a most honourable young man whom Providence itself⁠ ⁠… Mr. Razumov.”</p>
				<p>The General acknowledged the introduction by frowning at Razumov, who did not make the slightest movement.</p>
				<p>Sitting down before his desk the General listened with compressed lips. It was impossible to detect any sign of emotion on his face.</p>
				<p>Razumov watched the immobility of the fleshy profile. But it lasted only a moment, till the Prince had finished; and when the General turned to the providential young man, his florid complexion, the blue, unbelieving eyes and the bright white flash of an automatic smile had an air of jovial, careless cruelty. He expressed no wonder at the extraordinary story⁠—no pleasure or excitement⁠—no incredulity either. He betrayed no sentiment whatever. Only with a politeness almost deferential suggested that “the bird might have flown while Mr.⁠—Mr. Razumov was running about the streets.”</p>
				<p>Razumov advanced to the middle of the room and said, “The door is locked and I have the key in my pocket.”</p>
				<p>His loathing for the man was intense. It had come upon him so unawares that he felt he had not kept it out of his voice. The General looked up at him thoughtfully, and Razumov grinned.</p>
				<p>All this went over the head of Prince K⁠— seated in a deep armchair, very tired and impatient.</p>
				<p>“A student called Haldin,” said the General thoughtfully.</p>
				<p>Razumov ceased to grin.</p>
				<p>“That is his name,” he said unnecessarily loud. “Victor Victorovitch Haldin⁠—a student.”</p>
				<p>The General shifted his position a little.</p>
				<p>“How is he dressed? Would you have the goodness to tell me?”</p>
				<p>Razumov angrily described Haldin’s clothing in a few jerky words. The General stared all the time, then addressing the Prince⁠—</p>
				<p>“We were not without some indications,” he said in French. “A good woman who was in the street described to us somebody wearing a dress of the sort as the thrower of the second bomb. We have detained her at the Secretariat, and every one in a Tcherkess coat we could lay our hands on has been brought to her to look at. She kept on crossing herself and shaking her head at them. It was exasperating.⁠ ⁠…” He turned to Razumov, and in Russian, with friendly reproach⁠—</p>
				<p>“Take a chair, Mr. Razumov⁠—do. Why are you standing?”</p>
				<p>Razumov sat down carelessly and looked at the General.</p>
				<p>“This goggle-eyed imbecile understands nothing,” he thought.</p>
				<p>The Prince began to speak loftily.</p>
				<p>“Mr. Razumov is a young man of conspicuous abilities. I have it at heart that his future should not.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
				<p>“Certainly,” interrupted the General, with a movement of the hand. “Has he any weapons on him, do you think, Mr. Razumov?”</p>
				<p>The General employed a gentle musical voice. Razumov answered with suppressed irritation⁠—</p>
				<p>“No. But my razors are lying about⁠—you understand.”</p>
				<p>The General lowered his head approvingly.</p>
				<p>“Precisely.”</p>
				<p>Then to the Prince, explaining courteously⁠—</p>
				<p>“We want that bird alive. It will be the devil if we can’t make him sing a little before we are done with him.”</p>
				<p>The grave-like silence of the room with its mute clock fell upon the polite modulations of this terrible phrase. The Prince, hidden in the chair, made no sound.</p>
				<p>The General unexpectedly developed a thought.</p>
				<p>“Fidelity to menaced institutions on which depend the safety of a throne and of a people is no child’s play. We know that, <i>mon Prince,</i> and⁠—<i>tenez</i>⁠—” he went on with a sort of flattering harshness, “Mr. Razumov here begins to understand that too.”</p>
				<p>His eyes which he turned upon Razumov seemed to be starting out of his head. This grotesqueness of aspect no longer shocked Razumov. He said with gloomy conviction⁠—</p>
				<p>“Haldin will never speak.”</p>
				<p>“That remains to be seen,” muttered the General.</p>
				<p>“I am certain,” insisted Razumov. “A man like this never speaks.⁠ ⁠… Do you imagine that I am here from fear?” he added violently. He felt ready to stand by his opinion of Haldin to the last extremity.</p>
				<p>“Certainly not,” protested the General, with great simplicity of tone. “And I don’t mind telling you, Mr. Razumov, that if he had not come with his tale to such a staunch and loyal Russian as you, he would have disappeared like a stone in the water⁠ ⁠… which would have had a detestable effect,” he added, with a bright, cruel smile under his stony stare. “So you see, there can be no suspicion of any fear here.”</p>
				<p>The Prince intervened, looking at Razumov round the back of the armchair.</p>
				<p>“Nobody doubts the moral soundness of your action. Be at ease in that respect, pray.”</p>
				<p>He turned to the General uneasily.</p>
				<p>“That’s why I am here. You may be surprised why I should.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
				<p>The General hastened to interrupt.</p>
				<p>“Not at all. Extremely natural. You saw the importance.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
				<p>“Yes,” broke in the Prince. “And I venture to ask insistently that mine and Mr. Razumov’s intervention should not become public. He is a young man of promise⁠—of remarkable aptitudes.”</p>
				<p>“I haven’t a doubt of it,” murmured the General. “He inspires confidence.”</p>
				<p>“All sorts of pernicious views are so widespread nowadays⁠—they taint such unexpected quarters⁠—that, monstrous as it seems, he might suffer⁠ ⁠… his studies⁠ ⁠… his⁠ ⁠…”</p>
				<p>The General, with his elbows on the desk, took his head between his hands.</p>
				<p>“Yes. Yes. I am thinking it out.⁠ ⁠… How long is it since you left him at your rooms, Mr. Razumov?”</p>
				<p>Razumov mentioned the hour which nearly corresponded with the time of his distracted flight from the big slum house. He had made up his mind to keep Ziemianitch out of the affair completely. To mention him at all would mean imprisonment for the “bright soul,” perhaps cruel floggings, and in the end a journey to Siberia in chains. Razumov, who had beaten Ziemianitch, felt for him now a vague, remorseful tenderness.</p>
				<p>The General, giving way for the first time to his secret sentiments, exclaimed contemptuously⁠—</p>
				<p>“And you say he came in to make you this confidence like this⁠—for nothing⁠—<i>a propos des bottes</i>.”</p>
				<p>Razumov felt danger in the air. The merciless suspicion of despotism had spoken openly at last. Sudden fear sealed Razumov’s lips. The silence of the room resembled now the silence of a deep dungeon, where time does not count, and a suspect person is sometimes forgotten for ever. But the Prince came to the rescue.</p>
				<p>“Providence itself has led the wretch in a moment of mental aberration to seek Mr. Razumov on the strength of some old, utterly misinterpreted exchange of ideas⁠—some sort of idle speculative conversation⁠—months ago⁠—I am told⁠—and completely forgotten till now by Mr. Razumov.”</p>
				<p>“Mr. Razumov,” queried the General meditatively, after a short silence, “do you often indulge in speculative conversation?”</p>
				<p>“No, Excellency,” answered Razumov, coolly, in a sudden access of self-confidence. “I am a man of deep convictions. Crude opinions are in the air. They are not always worth combating. But even the silent contempt of a serious mind may be misinterpreted by headlong utopists.”</p>
				<p>The General stared from between his hands. Prince K⁠— murmured⁠—</p>
				<p>“A serious young man. <i>Un esprit superieur</i>.”</p>
				<p>“I see that, <i>mon cher Prince</i>,” said the General. “Mr. Razumov is quite safe with me. I am interested in him. He has, it seems, the great and useful quality of inspiring confidence. What I was wondering at is why the other should mention anything at all⁠—I mean even the bare fact alone⁠—if his object was only to obtain temporary shelter for a few hours. For, after all, nothing was easier than to say nothing about it unless, indeed, he were trying, under a crazy misapprehension of your true sentiments, to enlist your assistance⁠—eh, Mr. Razumov?”</p>
				<p>It seemed to Razumov that the floor was moving slightly. This grotesque man in a tight uniform was terrible. It was right that he should be terrible.</p>
				<p>“I can see what your Excellency has in your mind. But I can only answer that I don’t know why.”</p>
				<p>“I have nothing in my mind,” murmured the General, with gentle surprise.</p>
				<p>“I am his prey⁠—his helpless prey,” thought Razumov. The fatigues and the disgusts of that afternoon, the need to forget, the fear which he could not keep off, reawakened his hate for Haldin.</p>
				<p>“Then I can’t help your Excellency. I don’t know what he meant. I only know there was a moment when I wished to kill him. There was also a moment when I wished myself dead. I said nothing. I was overcome. I provoked no confidence⁠—I asked for no explanations⁠—”</p>
				<p>Razumov seemed beside himself; but his mind was lucid. It was really a calculated outburst.</p>
				<p>“It is rather a pity,” the General said, “that you did not. Don’t you know at all what he means to do?” Razumov calmed down and saw an opening there.</p>
				<p>“He told me he was in hopes that a sledge would meet him about half an hour after midnight at the seventh lamp-post on the left from the upper end of Karabelnaya. At any rate, he meant to be there at that time. He did not even ask me for a change of clothes.”</p>
				<p>“<i>Ah voila</i>!” said the General, turning to Prince K with an air of satisfaction. “There is a way to keep your <i>protege</i>, Mr. Razumov, quite clear of any connexion with the actual arrest. We shall be ready for that gentleman in Karabelnaya.”</p>
				<p>The Prince expressed his gratitude. There was real emotion in his voice. Razumov, motionless, silent, sat staring at the carpet. The General turned to him.</p>
				<p>“Half an hour after midnight. Till then we have to depend on you, Mr. Razumov. You don’t think he is likely to change his purpose?”</p>
				<p>“How can I tell?” said Razumov. “Those men are not of the sort that ever changes its purpose.”</p>
				<p>“What men do you mean?”</p>
				<p>“Fanatical lovers of liberty in general. Liberty with a capital L, Excellency. Liberty that means nothing precise. Liberty in whose name crimes are committed.”</p>
				<p>The General murmured⁠—</p>
				<p>“I detest rebels of every kind. I can’t help it. It’s my nature!”</p>
				<p>He clenched a fist and shook it, drawing back his arm. “They shall be destroyed, then.”</p>
				<p>“They have made a sacrifice of their lives beforehand,” said Razumov with malicious pleasure and looking the General straight in the face. “If Haldin does change his purpose to-night, you may depend on it that it will not be to save his life by flight in some other way. He would have thought then of something else to attempt. But that is not likely.”</p>
				<p>The General repeated as if to himself, “They shall be destroyed.”</p>
				<p>Razumov assumed an impenetrable expression.</p>
				<p>The Prince exclaimed⁠—</p>
				<p>“What a terrible necessity!”</p>
				<p>The General’s arm was lowered slowly.</p>
				<p>“One comfort there is. That brood leaves no posterity. I’ve always said it, one effort, pitiless, persistent, steady⁠—and we are done with them for ever.”</p>
				<p>Razumov thought to himself that this man entrusted with so much arbitrary power must have believed what he said or else he could not have gone on bearing the responsibility.</p>
				<p>“I detest rebels. These subversive minds! These intellectual <i>debauches</i>! My existence has been built on fidelity. It’s a feeling. To defend it I am ready to lay down my life⁠—and even my honour⁠—if that were needed. But pray tell me what honour can there be as against rebels⁠—against people that deny God Himself⁠—perfect unbelievers! Brutes. It is horrible to think of.”</p>
				<p>During this tirade Razumov, facing the General, had nodded slightly twice. Prince K⁠—, standing on one side with his grand air, murmured, casting up his eyes⁠—</p>
				<p>“<i>Helas!</i>”</p>
				<p>Then lowering his glance and with great decision declared⁠—</p>
				<p>“This young man, General, is perfectly fit to apprehend the bearing of your memorable words.”</p>
				<p>The General’s whole expression changed from dull resentment to perfect urbanity.</p>
				<p>“I would ask now, Mr. Razumov,” he said, “to return to his home. Note that I don’t ask Mr. Razumov whether he has justified his absence to his guest. No doubt he did this sufficiently. But I don’t ask. Mr. Razumov inspires confidence. It is a great gift. I only suggest that a more prolonged absence might awaken the criminal’s suspicions and induce him perhaps to change his plans.”</p>
				<p>He rose and with a scrupulous courtesy escorted his visitors to the ante-room encumbered with flower-pots.</p>
				<p>Razumov parted with the Prince at the corner of a street. In the carriage he had listened to speeches where natural sentiment struggled with caution. Evidently the Prince was afraid of encouraging any hopes of future intercourse. But there was a touch of tenderness in the voice uttering in the dark the guarded general phrases of goodwill. And the Prince too said⁠—</p>
				<p>“I have perfect confidence in you, Mr. Razumov.”</p>
				<p>“They all, it seems, have confidence in me,” thought Razumov dully. He had an indulgent contempt for the man sitting shoulder to shoulder with him in the confined space. Probably he was afraid of scenes with his wife. She was said to be proud and violent.</p>
				<p>It seemed to him bizarre that secrecy should play such a large part in the comfort and safety of lives. But he wanted to put the Prince’s mind at ease; and with a proper amount of emphasis he said that, being conscious of some small abilities and confident in his power of work, he trusted his future to his own exertions. He expressed his gratitude for the helping hand. Such dangerous situations did not occur twice in the course of one life⁠—he added.</p>
				<p>“And you have met this one with a firmness of mind and correctness of feeling which give me a high idea of your worth,” the Prince said solemnly. “You have now only to persevere⁠—to persevere.”</p>
				<p>On getting out on the pavement Razumov saw an ungloved hand extended to him through the lowered window of the brougham. It detained his own in its grasp for a moment, while the light of a street lamp fell upon the Prince’s long face and old-fashioned grey whiskers.</p>
				<p>“I hope you are perfectly reassured now as to the consequences⁠ ⁠…”</p>
				<p>“After what your Excellency has condescended to do for me, I can only rely on my conscience.”</p>
				<p>“<i>Adieu</i>,” said the whiskered head with feeling.</p>
				<p>Razumov bowed. The brougham glided away with a slight swish in the snow⁠—he was alone on the edge of the pavement.</p>
				<p>He said to himself that there was nothing to think about, and began walking towards his home.</p>
				<p>He walked quietly. It was a common experience to walk thus home to bed after an evening spent somewhere with his fellows or in the cheaper seats of a theatre. After he had gone a little way the familiarity of things got hold of him. Nothing was changed. There was the familiar corner; and when he turned it he saw the familiar dim light of the provision shop kept by a German woman. There were loaves of stale bread, bunches of onions and strings of sausages behind the small window-panes. They were closing it. The sickly lame fellow whom he knew so well by sight staggered out into the snow embracing a large shutter.</p>
				<p>Nothing would change. There was the familiar gateway yawning black with feeble glimmers marking the arches of the different staircases.</p>
				<p>The sense of life’s continuity depended on trifling bodily impressions. The trivialities of daily existence were an armour for the soul. And this thought reinforced the inward quietness of Razumov as he began to climb the stairs familiar to his feet in the dark, with his hand on the familiar clammy banister. The exceptional could not prevail against the material contacts which make one day resemble another. To-morrow would be like yesterday.</p>
				<p>It was only on the stage that the unusual was outwardly acknowledged.</p>
				<p>“I suppose,” thought Razumov, “that if I had made up my mind to blow out my brains on the landing I would be going up these stairs as quietly as I am doing it now. What’s a man to do? What must be must be. Extraordinary things do happen. But when they have happened they are done with. Thus, too, when the mind is made up. That question is done with. And the daily concerns, the familiarities of our thought swallow it up⁠—and the life goes on as before with its mysterious and secret sides quite out of sight, as they should be. Life is a public thing.”</p>
				<p>Razumov unlocked his door and took the key out; entered very quietly and bolted the door behind him carefully.</p>
				<p>He thought, “He hears me,” and after bolting the door he stood still holding his breath. There was not a sound. He crossed the bare outer room, stepping deliberately in the darkness. Entering the other, he felt all over his table for the matchbox. The silence, but for the groping of his hand, was profound. Could the fellow be sleeping so soundly?</p>
				<p>He struck a light and looked at the bed. Haldin was lying on his back as before, only both his hands were under his head. His eyes were open. He stared at the ceiling.</p>
				<p>Razumov held the match up. He saw the clear-cut features, the firm chin, the white forehead and the topknot of fair hair against the white pillow. There he was, lying flat on his back. Razumov thought suddenly, “I have walked over his chest.”</p>
				<p>He continued to stare till the match burnt itself out; then struck another and lit the lamp in silence without looking towards the bed any more. He had turned his back on it and was hanging his coat on a peg when he heard Haldin sigh profoundly, then ask in a tired voice⁠—</p>
				<p>“Well! And what have you arranged?”</p>
				<p>The emotion was so great that Razumov was glad to put his hands against the wall. A diabolical impulse to say, “I have given you up to the police,” frightened him exceedingly. But he did not say that. He said, without turning round, in a muffled voice⁠—</p>
				<p>“It’s done.”</p>
				<p>Again he heard Haldin sigh. He walked to the table, sat down with the lamp before him, and only then looked towards the bed.</p>
				<p>In the distant corner of the large room far away from the lamp, which was small and provided with a very thick china shade, Haldin appeared like a dark and elongated shape⁠—rigid with the immobility of death. This body seemed to have less substance than its own phantom walked over by Razumov in the street white with snow. It was more alarming in its shadowy, persistent reality than the distinct but vanishing illusion.</p>
				<p>Haldin was heard again.</p>
				<p>“You must have had a walk⁠—such a walk,⁠ ⁠…” he murmured deprecatingly. “This weather.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
				<p>Razumov answered with energy⁠—</p>
				<p>“Horrible walk.⁠ ⁠… A nightmare of a walk.”</p>
				<p>He shuddered audibly. Haldin sighed once more, then⁠—</p>
				<p>“And so you have seen Ziemianitch⁠—brother?”</p>
				<p>“I’ve seen him.”</p>
				<p>Razumov, remembering the time he had spent with the Prince, thought it prudent to add, “I had to wait some time.”</p>
				<p>“A character⁠—eh? It’s extraordinary what a sense of the necessity of freedom there is in that man. And he has sayings too⁠—simple, to the point, such as only the people can invent in their rough sagacity. A character that.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
				<p>“I, you understand, haven’t had much opportunity.⁠ ⁠…” Razumov muttered through his teeth.</p>
				<p>Haldin continued to stare at the ceiling.</p>
				<p>“You see, brother, I have been a good deal in that house of late. I used to take there books⁠—leaflets. Not a few of the poor people who live there can read. And, you see, the guests for the feast of freedom must be sought for in byways and hedges. The truth is, I have almost lived in that house of late. I slept sometimes in the stable. There is a stable.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
				<p>“That’s where I had my interview with Ziemianitch,” interrupted Razumov gently. A mocking spirit entered into him and he added, “It was satisfactory in a sense. I came away from it much relieved.”</p>
				<p>“Ah! he’s a fellow,” went on Haldin, talking slowly at the ceiling. “I came to know him in that way, you see. For some weeks now, ever since I resigned myself to do what had to be done, I tried to isolate myself. I gave up my rooms. What was the good of exposing a decent widow woman to the risk of being worried out of her mind by the police? I gave up seeing any of our comrades.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
				<p>Razumov drew to himself a half-sheet of paper and began to trace lines on it with a pencil.</p>
				<p>“Upon my word,” he thought angrily, “he seems to have thought of everybody’s safety but mine.”</p>
				<p>Haldin was talking on.</p>
				<p>“This morning⁠—ah! this morning⁠—that was different. How can I explain to you? Before the deed was done I wandered at night and lay hid in the day, thinking it out, and I felt restful. Sleepless but restful. What was there for me to torment myself about? But this morning⁠—after! Then it was that I became restless. I could not have stopped in that big house full of misery. The miserable of this world can’t give you peace. Then when that silly caretaker began to shout, I said to myself, ‘There is a young man in this town head and shoulders above common prejudices.’ ”</p>
				<p>“Is he laughing at me?” Razumov asked himself, going on with his aimless drawing of triangles and squares. And suddenly he thought: “My behaviour must appear to him strange. Should he take fright at my manner and rush off somewhere I shall be undone completely. That infernal General.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
				<p>He dropped the pencil and turned abruptly towards the bed with the shadowy figure extended full length on it⁠—so much more indistinct than the one over whose breast he had walked without faltering. Was this, too, a phantom?</p>
				<p>The silence had lasted a long time. “He is no longer here,” was the thought against which Razumov struggled desperately, quite frightened at its absurdity. “He is already gone and this⁠ ⁠… only⁠ ⁠…”</p>
				<p>He could resist no longer. He sprang to his feet, saying aloud, “I am intolerably anxious,” and in a few headlong strides stood by the side of the bed. His hand fell lightly on Haldin’s shoulder, and directly he felt its reality he was beset by an insane temptation to grip that exposed throat and squeeze the breath out of that body, lest it should escape his custody, leaving only a phantom behind.</p>
				<p>Haldin did not stir a limb, but his overshadowed eyes moving a little gazed upwards at Razumov with wistful gratitude for this manifestation of feeling.</p>
				<p>Razumov turned away and strode up and down the room. “It would have been possibly a kindness,” he muttered to himself, and was appalled by the nature of that apology for a murderous intention his mind had found somewhere within him. And all the same he could not give it up. He became lucid about it. “What can he expect?” he thought. “The halter⁠—in the end. And I.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
				<p>This argument was interrupted by Haldin’s voice.</p>
				<p>“Why be anxious for me? They can kill my body, but they cannot exile my soul from this world. I tell you what⁠—I believe in this world so much that I cannot conceive eternity otherwise than as a very long life. That is perhaps the reason I am so ready to die.”</p>
				<p>“H’m,” muttered Razumov, and biting his lower lip he continued to walk up and down and to carry on his strange argument.</p>
				<p>Yes, to a man in such a situation⁠—of course it would be an act of kindness. The question, however, was not how to be kind, but how to be firm. He was a slippery customer.</p>
				<p>“I too, Victor Victorovitch, believe in this world of ours,” he said with force. “I too, while I live.⁠ ⁠… But you seem determined to haunt it. You can’t seriously⁠ ⁠… mean⁠ ⁠…”</p>
				<p>The voice of the motionless Haldin began⁠—</p>
				<p>“Haunt it! Truly, the oppressors of thought which quickens the world, the destroyers of souls which aspire to perfection of human dignity, they shall be haunted. As to the destroyers of my mere body, I have forgiven them beforehand.”</p>
				<p>Razumov had stopped apparently to listen, but at the same time he was observing his own sensations. He was vexed with himself for attaching so much importance to what Haldin said.</p>
				<p>“The fellow’s mad,” he thought firmly, but this opinion did not mollify him towards Haldin. It was a particularly impudent form of lunacy⁠—and when it got loose in the sphere of public life of a country, it was obviously the duty of every good citizen.⁠ ⁠…</p>
				<p>This train of thought broke off short there and was succeeded by a paroxysm of silent hatred towards Haldin, so intense that Razumov hastened to speak at random.</p>
				<p>“Yes. Eternity, of course. I, too, can’t very well represent it to myself.⁠ ⁠… I imagine it, however, as something quiet and dull. There would be nothing unexpected⁠—don’t you see? The element of time would be wanting.”</p>
				<p>He pulled out his watch and gazed at it. Haldin turned over on his side and looked on intently.</p>
				<p>Razumov got frightened at this movement. A slippery customer this fellow with a phantom. It was not midnight yet. He hastened on⁠—</p>
				<p>“And unfathomable mysteries! Can you conceive secret places in Eternity? Impossible. Whereas life is full of them. There are secrets of birth, for instance. One carries them on to the grave. There is something comical⁠ ⁠… but never mind. And there are secret motives of conduct. A man’s most open actions have a secret side to them. That is interesting and so unfathomable! For instance, a man goes out of a room for a walk. Nothing more trivial in appearance. And yet it may be momentous. He comes back⁠—he has seen perhaps a drunken brute, taken particular notice of the snow on the ground⁠—and behold he is no longer the same man. The most unlikely things have a secret power over one’s thoughts⁠—the grey whiskers of a particular person⁠—the goggle eyes of another.”</p>
				<p>Razumov’s forehead was moist. He took a turn or two in the room, his head low and smiling to himself viciously.</p>
				<p>“Have you ever reflected on the power of goggle eyes and grey whiskers? Excuse me. You seem to think I must be crazy to talk in this vein at such a time. But I am not talking lightly. I have seen instances. It has happened to me once to be talking to a man whose fate was affected by physical facts of that kind. And the man did not know it. Of course, it was a case of conscience, but the material facts such as these brought about the solution.⁠ ⁠… And you tell me, Victor Victorovitch, not to be anxious! Why! I am responsible for you,” Razumov almost shrieked.</p>
				<p>He avoided with difficulty a burst of Mephistophelian laughter. Haldin, very pale, raised himself on his elbow.</p>
				<p>“And the surprises of life,” went on Razumov, after glancing at the other uneasily. “Just consider their astonishing nature. A mysterious impulse induces you to come here. I don’t say you have done wrong. Indeed, from a certain point of view you could not have done better. You might have gone to a man with affections and family ties. You have such ties yourself. As to me, you know I have been brought up in an educational institute where they did not give us enough to eat. To talk of affection in such a connexion⁠—you perceive yourself.⁠ ⁠… As to ties, the only ties I have in the world are social. I must get acknowledged in some way before I can act at all. I sit here working.⁠ ⁠… And don’t you think I am working for progress too? I’ve got to find my own ideas of the true way.⁠ ⁠… Pardon me,” continued Razumov, after drawing breath and with a short, throaty laugh, “but I haven’t inherited a revolutionary inspiration together with a resemblance from an uncle.”</p>
				<p>He looked again at his watch and noticed with sickening disgust that there were yet a good many minutes to midnight. He tore watch and chain off his waistcoat and laid them on the table well in the circle of bright lamplight. Haldin, reclining on his elbow, did not stir. Razumov was made uneasy by this attitude. “What move is he meditating over so quietly?” he thought. “He must be prevented. I must keep on talking to him.”</p>
				<p>He raised his voice.</p>
				<p>“You are a son, a brother, a nephew, a cousin⁠—I don’t know what⁠—to no end of people. I am just a man. Here I stand before you. A man with a mind. Did it ever occur to you how a man who had never heard a word of warm affection or praise in his life would think on matters on which you would think first with or against your class, your domestic tradition⁠—your fireside prejudices?⁠ ⁠… Did you ever consider how a man like that would feel? I have no domestic tradition. I have nothing to think against. My tradition is historical. What have I to look back to but that national past from which you gentlemen want to wrench away your future? Am I to let my intelligence, my aspirations towards a better lot, be robbed of the only thing it has to go upon at the will of violent enthusiasts? You come from your province, but all this land is mine⁠—or I have nothing. No doubt you shall be looked upon as a martyr some day⁠—a sort of hero⁠—a political saint. But I beg to be excused. I am content in fitting myself to be a worker. And what can you people do by scattering a few drops of blood on the snow? On this Immensity. On this unhappy Immensity! I tell you,” he cried, in a vibrating, subdued voice, and advancing one step nearer the bed, “that what it needs is not a lot of haunting phantoms that I could walk through⁠—but a man!”</p>
				<p>Haldin threw his arms forward as if to keep him off in horror.</p>
				<p>“I understand it all now,” he exclaimed, with awestruck dismay. “I understand⁠—at last.”</p>
				<p>Razumov staggered back against the table. His forehead broke out in perspiration while a cold shudder ran down his spine.</p>
				<p>“What have I been saying?” he asked himself. “Have I let him slip through my fingers after all?”</p>
				<p>“He felt his lips go stiff like buckram, and instead of a reassuring smile only achieved an uncertain grimace.</p>
				<p>“What will you have?” he began in a conciliating voice which got steady after the first trembling word or two. “What will you have? Consider⁠—a man of studious, retired habits⁠—and suddenly like this.⁠ ⁠… I am not practised in talking delicately. But⁠ ⁠…”</p>
				<p>He felt anger, a wicked anger, get hold of him again.</p>
				<p>“What were we to do together till midnight? Sit here opposite each other and think of your⁠—your⁠—shambles?”</p>
				<p>Haldin had a subdued, heartbroken attitude. He bowed his head; his hands hung between his knees. His voice was low and pained but calm.</p>
				<p>“I see now how it is, Razumov⁠—brother. You are a magnanimous soul, but my action is abhorrent to you⁠—alas.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
				<p>Razumov stared. From fright he had set his teeth so hard that his whole face ached. It was impossible for him to make a sound.</p>
				<p>“And even my person, too, is loathsome to you perhaps,” Haldin added mournfully, after a short pause, looking up for a moment, then fixing his gaze on the floor. “For indeed, unless one.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
				<p>He broke off evidently waiting for a word. Razumov remained silent. Haldin nodded his head dejectedly twice.</p>
				<p>“Of course. Of course,” he murmured.⁠ ⁠… “Ah! weary work!”</p>
				<p>He remained perfectly still for a moment, then made Razumov’s leaden heart strike a ponderous blow by springing up briskly.</p>
				<p>“So be it,” he cried sadly in a low, distinct tone. “Farewell then.”</p>
				<p>Razumov started forward, but the sight of Haldin’s raised hand checked him before he could get away from the table. He leaned on it heavily, listening to the faint sounds of some town clock tolling the hour. Haldin, already at the door, tall and straight as an arrow, with his pale face and a hand raised attentively, might have posed for the statue of a daring youth listening to an inner voice. Razumov mechanically glanced down at his watch. When he looked towards the door again Haldin had vanished. There was a faint rustling in the outer room, the feeble click of a bolt drawn back lightly. He was gone⁠—almost as noiseless as a vision.</p>
				<p>Razumov ran forward unsteadily, with parted, voiceless lips. The outer door stood open. Staggering out on the landing, he leaned far over the banister. Gazing down into the deep black shaft with a tiny glimmering flame at the bottom, he traced by ear the rapid spiral descent of somebody running down the stairs on tiptoe. It was a light, swift, pattering sound, which sank away from him into the depths: a fleeting shadow passed over the glimmer⁠—a wink of the tiny flame. Then stillness.</p>
				<p>Razumov hung over, breathing the cold raw air tainted by the evil smells of the unclean staircase. All quiet.</p>
				<p>He went back into his room slowly, shutting the doors after him. The peaceful steady light of his reading-lamp shone on the watch. Razumov stood looking down at the little white dial. It wanted yet three minutes to midnight. He took the watch into his hand fumblingly.</p>
				<p>“Slow,” he muttered, and a strange fit of nervelessness came over him. His knees shook, the watch and chain slipped through his fingers in an instant and fell on the floor. He was so startled that he nearly fell himself. When at last he regained enough confidence in his limbs to stoop for it he held it to his ear at once. After a while he growled⁠—</p>
				<p>“Stopped,” and paused for quite a long time before he muttered sourly⁠—</p>
				<p>“It’s done.⁠ ⁠… And now to work.”</p>
				<p>He sat down, reached haphazard for a book, opened it in middle and began to read; but after going conscientiously over two lines he lost his hold on the print completely and did not try to regain it. He thought⁠—</p>
				<p>“There was to a certainty a police agent of some sort watching the house across the street.”</p>
				<p>He imagined him lurking in a dark gateway, goggle-eyed, muffled up in a cloak to the nose and with a General’s plumed, cocked hat on his head. This absurdity made him start in the chair convulsively. He literally had to shake his head violently to get rid of it. The man would be disguised perhaps as a peasant⁠ ⁠… a beggar.⁠ ⁠… Perhaps he would be just buttoned up in a dark overcoat and carrying a loaded stick⁠—a shifty-eyed rascal, smelling of raw onions and spirits.</p>
				<p>This evocation brought on positive nausea. “Why do I want to bother about this?” thought Razumov with disgust. “Am I a gendarme? Moreover, it is done.”</p>
				<p>He got up in great agitation. It was not done. Not yet. Not till half-past twelve. And the watch had stopped. This reduced him to despair. Impossible to know the time! The landlady and all the people across the landing were asleep. How could he go and⁠ ⁠… God knows what they would imagine, or how much they would guess. He dared not go into the streets to find out. “I am a suspect now. There’s no use shirking that fact,” he said to himself bitterly. If Haldin from some cause or another gave them the slip and failed to turn up in the Karabelnaya the police would be invading his lodging. And if he were not in he could never clear himself. Never. Razumov looked wildly about as if for some means of seizing upon time which seemed to have escaped him altogether. He had never, as far as he could remember, heard the striking of that town clock in his rooms before this night. And he was not even sure now whether he had heard it really on this night.</p>
				<p>He went to the window and stood there with slightly bent head on the watch for the faint sound. “I will stay here till I hear something,” he said to himself. He stood still, his ear turned to the panes. An atrocious aching numbness with shooting pains in his back and legs tortured him. He did not budge. His mind hovered on the borders of delirium. He heard himself suddenly saying, “I confess,” as a person might do on the rack. “I am on the rack,” he thought. He felt ready to swoon. The faint deep boom of the distant clock seemed to explode in his head⁠—he heard it so clearly.⁠ ⁠… One!</p>
				<p>If Haldin had not turned up the police would have been already here ransacking the house. No sound reached him. This time it was done.</p>
				<p>He dragged himself painfully to the table and dropped into the chair. He flung the book away and took a square sheet of paper. It was like the pile of sheets covered with his neat minute handwriting, only blank. He took a pen brusquely and dipped it with a vague notion of going on with the writing of his essay⁠—but his pen remained poised over the sheet. It hung there for some time before it came down and formed long scrawly letters.</p>
				<p>Still-faced and his lips set hard, Razumov began to write. When he wrote a large hand his neat writing lost its character altogether⁠—became unsteady, almost childish. He wrote five lines one under the other. History not Theory. Patriotism not Internationalism. Evolution not Revolution. Direction not Destruction. Unity not Disruption.</p>
				<p>He gazed at them dully. Then his eyes strayed to the bed and remained fixed there for a good many minutes, while his right hand groped all over the table for the penknife.</p>
				<p>He rose at last, and walking up with measured steps stabbed the paper with the penknife to the lath and plaster wall at the head of the bed. This done he stepped back a pace and flourished his hand with a glance round the room.</p>
				<p>After that he never looked again at the bed. He took his big cloak down from its peg and, wrapping himself up closely, went to lie down on the hard horse-hair sofa at the other side of his room. A leaden sleep closed his eyelids at once. Several times that night he woke up shivering from a dream of walking through drifts of snow in a Russia where he was as completely alone as any betrayed autocrat could be; an immense, wintry Russia which, somehow, his view could embrace in all its enormous expanse as if it were a map. But after each shuddering start his heavy eyelids fell over his glazed eyes and he slept again.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-1-3" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</h3>
				<p>Approaching this part of Mr. Razumov’s story, my mind, the decent mind of an old teacher of languages, feels more and more the difficulty of the task.</p>
				<p>The task is not in truth the writing in the narrative form a <i>precis</i> of a strange human document, but the rendering⁠—I perceive it now clearly⁠—of the moral conditions ruling over a large portion of this earth’s surface; conditions not easily to be understood, much less discovered in the limits of a story, till some key-word is found; a word that could stand at the back of all the words covering the pages; a word which, if not truth itself, may perchance hold truth enough to help the moral discovery which should be the object of every tale.</p>
				<p>I turn over for the hundredth time the leaves of Mr. Razumov’s record, I lay it aside, I take up the pen⁠—and the pen being ready for its office of setting down black on white I hesitate. For the word that persists in creeping under its point is no other word than “cynicism.”</p>
				<p>For that is the mark of Russian autocracy and of Russian revolt. In its pride of numbers, in its strange pretensions of sanctity, and in the secret readiness to abase itself in suffering, the spirit of Russia is the spirit of cynicism. It informs the declarations of her statesmen, the theories of her revolutionists, and the mystic vaticinations of prophets to the point of making freedom look like a form of debauch, and the Christian virtues themselves appear actually indecent.⁠ ⁠… But I must apologize for the digression. It proceeds from the consideration of the course taken by the story of Mr. Razumov after his conservative convictions, diluted in a vague liberalism natural to the ardour of his age, had become crystallized by the shock of his contact with Haldin.</p>
				<p>Razumov woke up for the tenth time perhaps with a heavy shiver. Seeing the light of day in his window, he resisted the inclination to lay himself down again. He did not remember anything, but he did not think it strange to find himself on the sofa in his cloak and chilled to the bone. The light coming through the window seemed strangely cheerless, containing no promise as the light of each new day should for a young man. It was the awakening of a man mortally ill, or of a man ninety years old. He looked at the lamp which had burnt itself out. It stood there, the extinguished beacon of his labours, a cold object of brass and porcelain, amongst the scattered pages of his notes and small piles of books⁠—a mere litter of blackened paper⁠—dead matter⁠—without significance or interest.</p>
				<p>He got on his feet, and divesting himself of his cloak hung it on the peg, going through all the motions mechanically. An incredible dullness, a ditch-water stagnation was sensible to his perceptions as though life had withdrawn itself from all things and even from his own thoughts. There was not a sound in the house.</p>
				<p>Turning away from the peg, he thought in that same lifeless manner that it must be very early yet; but when he looked at the watch on his table he saw both hands arrested at twelve o’clock.</p>
				<p>“Ah! yes,” he mumbled to himself, and as if beginning to get roused a little he took a survey of his room. The paper stabbed to the wall arrested his attention. He eyed it from the distance without approval or perplexity; but when he heard the servant-girl beginning to bustle about in the outer room with the <i>samovar</i> for his morning tea, he walked up to it and took it down with an air of profound indifference.</p>
				<p>While doing this he glanced down at the bed on which he had not slept that night. The hollow in the pillow made by the weight of Haldin’s head was very noticeable.</p>
				<p>Even his anger at this sign of the man’s passage was dull. He did not try to nurse it into life. He did nothing all that day; he neglected even to brush his hair. The idea of going out never occurred to him⁠—and if he did not start a connected train of thought it was not because he was unable to think. It was because he was not interested enough.</p>
				<p>He yawned frequently. He drank large quantities of tea, he walked about aimlessly, and when he sat down he did not budge for a long time. He spent some time drumming on the window with his finger-tips quietly. In his listless wanderings round about the table he caught sight of his own face in the looking-glass and that arrested him. The eyes which returned his stare were the most unhappy eyes he had ever seen. And this was the first thing which disturbed the mental stagnation of that day.</p>
				<p>He was not affected personally. He merely thought that life without happiness is impossible. What was happiness? He yawned and went on shuffling about and about between the walls of his room. Looking forward was happiness⁠—that’s all⁠—nothing more. To look forward to the gratification of some desire, to the gratification of some passion, love, ambition, hate⁠—hate too indubitably. Love and hate. And to escape the dangers of existence, to live without fear, was also happiness. There was nothing else. Absence of fear⁠—looking forward. “Oh! the miserable lot of humanity!” he exclaimed mentally; and added at once in his thought, “I ought to be happy enough as far as that goes.” But he was not excited by that assurance. On the contrary, he yawned again as he had been yawning all day. He was mildly surprised to discover himself being overtaken by night. The room grew dark swiftly though time had seemed to stand still. How was it that he had not noticed the passing of that day? Of course, it was the watch being stopped.⁠ ⁠…</p>
				<p>He did not light his lamp, but went over to the bed and threw himself on it without any hesitation. Lying on his back, he put his hands under his head and stared upward. After a moment he thought, “I am lying here like that man. I wonder if he slept while I was struggling with the blizzard in the streets. No, he did not sleep. But why should I not sleep?” and he felt the silence of the night press upon all his limbs like a weight.</p>
				<p>In the calm of the hard frost outside, the clear-cut strokes of the town clock counting off midnight penetrated the quietness of his suspended animation.</p>
				<p>Again he began to think. It was twenty-four hours since that man left his room. Razumov had a distinct feeling that Haldin in the fortress was sleeping that night. It was a certitude which made him angry because he did not want to think of Haldin, but he justified it to himself by physiological and psychological reasons. The fellow had hardly slept for weeks on his own confession, and now every incertitude was at an end for him. No doubt he was looking forward to the consummation of his martyrdom. A man who resigns himself to kill need not go very far for resignation to die. Haldin slept perhaps more soundly than General T⁠—, whose task⁠—weary work too⁠—was not done, and over whose head hung the sword of revolutionary vengeance.</p>
				<p>Razumov, remembering the thick-set man with his heavy jowl resting on the collar of his uniform, the champion of autocracy, who had let no sign of surprise, incredulity, or joy escape him, but whose goggle eyes could express a mortal hatred of all rebellion⁠—Razumov moved uneasily on the bed.</p>
				<p>“He suspected me,” he thought. “I suppose he must suspect everybody. He would be capable of suspecting his own wife, if Haldin had gone to her boudoir with his confession.”</p>
				<p>Razumov sat up in anguish. Was he to remain a political suspect all his days? Was he to go through life as a man not wholly to be trusted⁠—with a bad secret police note tacked on to his record? What sort of future could he look forward to?</p>
				<p>“I am now a suspect,” he thought again; but the habit of reflection and that desire of safety, of an ordered life, which was so strong in him came to his assistance as the night wore on. His quiet, steady, and laborious existence would vouch at length for his loyalty. There were many permitted ways to serve one’s country. There was an activity that made for progress without being revolutionary. The field of influence was great and infinitely varied⁠—once one had conquered a name.</p>
				<p>His thought like a circling bird reverted after four-and-twenty hours to the silver medal, and as it were poised itself there.</p>
				<p>When the day broke he had not slept, not for a moment, but he got up not very tired and quite sufficiently self-possessed for all practical purposes.</p>
				<p>He went out and attended three lectures in the morning. But the work in the library was a mere dumb show of research. He sat with many volumes open before him trying to make notes and extracts. His new tranquillity was like a flimsy garment, and seemed to float at the mercy of a casual word. Betrayal! Why! the fellow had done all that was necessary to betray himself. Precious little had been needed to deceive him.</p>
				<p>“I have said no word to him that was not strictly true. Not one word,” Razumov argued with himself.</p>
				<p>Once engaged on this line of thought there could be no question of doing useful work. The same ideas went on passing through his mind, and he pronounced mentally the same words over and over again. He shut up all the books and rammed all his papers into his pocket with convulsive movements, raging inwardly against Haldin.</p>
				<p>As he was leaving the library a long bony student in a threadbare overcoat joined him, stepping moodily by his side. Razumov answered his mumbled greeting without looking at him at all.</p>
				<p>“What does he want with me?” he thought with a strange dread of the unexpected which he tried to shake off lest it should fasten itself upon his life for good and all. And the other, muttering cautiously with downcast eyes, supposed that his comrade had seen the news of de P⁠—’s executioner⁠—that was the expression he used⁠—having been arrested the night before last.⁠ ⁠…</p>
				<p>“I’ve been ill⁠—shut up in my rooms,” Razumov mumbled through his teeth.</p>
				<p>The tall student, raising his shoulders, shoved his hands deep into his pockets. He had a hairless, square, tallowy chin which trembled slightly as he spoke, and his nose nipped bright red by the sharp air looked like a false nose of painted cardboard between the sallow cheeks. His whole appearance was stamped with the mark of cold and hunger. He stalked deliberately at Razumov’s elbow with his eyes on the ground.</p>
				<p>“It’s an official statement,” he continued in the same cautious mutter. “It may be a lie. But there was somebody arrested between midnight and one in the morning on Tuesday. This is certain.”</p>
				<p>And talking rapidly under the cover of his downcast air, he told Razumov that this was known through an inferior Government clerk employed at the Central Secretariat. That man belonged to one of the revolutionary circles. “The same, in fact, I am affiliated to,” remarked the student.</p>
				<p>They were crossing a wide quadrangle. An infinite distress possessed Razumov, annihilated his energy, and before his eyes everything appeared confused and as if evanescent. He dared not leave the fellow there. “He may be affiliated to the police,” was the thought that passed through his mind. “Who could tell?” But eyeing the miserable frost-nipped, famine-struck figure of his companion he perceived the absurdity of his suspicion.</p>
				<p>“But I⁠—you know⁠—I don’t belong to any circle. I.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
				<p>He dared not say any more. Neither dared he mend his pace. The other, raising and setting down his lamentably shod feet with exact deliberation, protested in a low tone that it was not necessary for everybody to belong to an organization. The most valuable personalities remained outside. Some of the best work was done outside the organization. Then very fast, with whispering, feverish lips⁠—</p>
				<p>“The man arrested in the street was Haldin.”</p>
				<p>And accepting Razumov’s dismayed silence as natural enough, he assured him that there was no mistake. That Government clerk was on night duty at the Secretariat. Hearing a great noise of footsteps in the hall and aware that political prisoners were brought over sometimes at night from the fortress, he opened the door of the room in which he was working, suddenly. Before the gendarme on duty could push him back and slam the door in his face, he had seen a prisoner being partly carried, partly dragged along the hall by a lot of policemen. He was being used very brutally. And the clerk had recognized Haldin perfectly. Less than half an hour afterwards General T⁠— arrived at the Secretariat to examine that prisoner personally.</p>
				<p>“Aren’t you astonished?” concluded the gaunt student.</p>
				<p>“No,” said Razumov roughly⁠—and at once regretted his answer.</p>
				<p>“Everybody supposed Haldin was in the provinces⁠—with his people. Didn’t you?”</p>
				<p>The student turned his big hollow eyes upon Razumov, who said unguardedly⁠—</p>
				<p>“His people are abroad.”</p>
				<p>He could have bitten his tongue out with vexation. The student pronounced in a tone of profound meaning⁠—</p>
				<p>“So! You alone were aware,⁠ ⁠…” and stopped.</p>
				<p>“They have sworn my ruin,” thought Razumov. “Have you spoken of this to anyone else?” he asked with bitter curiosity.</p>
				<p>The other shook his head.</p>
				<p>“No, only to you. Our circle thought that as Haldin had been often heard expressing a warm appreciation of your character.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
				<p>Razumov could not restrain a gesture of angry despair which the other must have misunderstood in some way, because he ceased speaking and turned away his black, lack-lustre eyes.</p>
				<p>They moved side by side in silence. Then the gaunt student began to whisper again, with averted gaze⁠—</p>
				<p>“As we have at present no one affiliated inside the fortress so as to make it possible to furnish him with a packet of poison, we have considered already some sort of retaliatory action⁠—to follow very soon.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
				<p>Razumov trudging on interrupted⁠—</p>
				<p>“Were you acquainted with Haldin? Did he know where you live?”</p>
				<p>“I had the happiness to hear him speak twice,” his companion answered in the feverish whisper contrasting with the gloomy apathy of his face and bearing. “He did not know where I live.⁠ ⁠… I am lodging poorly with an artisan family.⁠ ⁠… I have just a corner in a room. It is not very practicable to see me there, but if you should need me for anything I am ready.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
				<p>Razumov trembled with rage and fear. He was beside himself, but kept his voice low.</p>
				<p>“You are not to come near me. You are not to speak to me. Never address a single word to me. I forbid you.”</p>
				<p>“Very well,” said the other submissively, showing no surprise whatever at this abrupt prohibition. “You don’t wish for secret reasons⁠ ⁠… perfectly⁠ ⁠… I understand.”</p>
				<p>He edged away at once, not looking up even; and Razumov saw his gaunt, shabby, famine-stricken figure cross the street obliquely with lowered head and that peculiar exact motion of the feet.</p>
				<p>He watched him as one would watch a vision out of a nightmare, then he continued on his way, trying not to think. On his landing the landlady seemed to be waiting for him. She was a short, thick, shapeless woman with a large yellow face wrapped up everlastingly in a black woollen shawl. When she saw him come up the last flight of stairs she flung both her arms up excitedly, then clasped her hands before her face.</p>
				<p>“Kirylo Sidorovitch⁠—little father⁠—what have you been doing? And such a quiet young man, too! The police are just gone this moment after searching your rooms.”</p>
				<p>Razumov gazed down at her with silent, scrutinizing attention. Her puffy yellow countenance was working with emotion. She screwed up her eyes at him entreatingly.</p>
				<p>“Such a sensible young man! Anybody can see you are sensible. And now⁠—like this⁠—all at once.⁠ ⁠… What is the good of mixing yourself up with these Nihilists? Do give over, little father. They are unlucky people.”</p>
				<p>Razumov moved his shoulders slightly.</p>
				<p>“Or is it that some secret enemy has been calumniating you, Kirylo Sidorovitch? The world is full of black hearts and false denunciations nowadays. There is much fear about.”</p>
				<p>“Have you heard that I have been denounced by some one?” asked Razumov, without taking his eyes off her quivering face.</p>
				<p>But she had not heard anything. She had tried to find out by asking the police captain while his men were turning the room upside down. The police captain of the district had known her for the last eleven years and was a humane person. But he said to her on the landing, looking very black and vexed⁠—</p>
				<p>“My good woman, do not ask questions. I don’t know anything myself. The order comes from higher quarters.”</p>
				<p>And indeed there had appeared, shortly after the arrival of the policemen of the district, a very superior gentleman in a fur coat and a shiny hat, who sat down in the room and looked through all the papers himself. He came alone and went away by himself, taking nothing with him. She had been trying to put things straight a little since they left.</p>
				<p>Razumov turned away brusquely and entered his rooms.</p>
				<p>All his books had been shaken and thrown on the floor. His landlady followed him, and stooping painfully began to pick them up into her apron. His papers and notes which were kept always neatly sorted (they all related to his studies) had been shuffled up and heaped together into a ragged pile in the middle of the table.</p>
				<p>This disorder affected him profoundly, unreasonably. He sat down and stared. He had a distinct sensation of his very existence being undermined in some mysterious manner, of his moral supports falling away from him one by one. He even experienced a slight physical giddiness and made a movement as if to reach for something to steady himself with.</p>
				<p>The old woman, rising to her feet with a low groan, shot all the books she had collected in her apron on to the sofa and left the room muttering and sighing.</p>
				<p>It was only then that he noticed that the sheet of paper which for one night had remained stabbed to the wall above his empty bed was lying on top of the pile.</p>
				<p>When he had taken it down the day before he had folded it in four, absent-mindedly, before dropping it on the table. And now he saw it lying uppermost, spread out, smoothed out even and covering all the confused pile of pages, the record of his intellectual life for the last three years. It had not been flung there. It had been placed there⁠—smoothed out, too! He guessed in that an intention of profound meaning⁠—or perhaps some inexplicable mockery.</p>
				<p>He sat staring at the piece of paper till his eyes began to smart. He did not attempt to put his papers in order, either that evening or the next day⁠—which he spent at home in a state of peculiar irresolution. This irresolution bore upon the question whether he should continue to live⁠—neither more nor less. But its nature was very far removed from the hesitation of a man contemplating suicide. The idea of laying violent hands upon his body did not occur to Razumov. The unrelated organism bearing that label, walking, breathing, wearing these clothes, was of no importance to anyone, unless maybe to the landlady. The true Razumov had his being in the willed, in the determined future⁠—in that future menaced by the lawlessness of autocracy⁠—for autocracy knows no law⁠—and the lawlessness of revolution. The feeling that his moral personality was at the mercy of these lawless forces was so strong that he asked himself seriously if it were worth while to go on accomplishing the mental functions of that existence which seemed no longer his own.</p>
				<p>“What is the good of exerting my intelligence, of pursuing the systematic development of my faculties and all my plans of work?” he asked himself. “I want to guide my conduct by reasonable convictions, but what security have I against something⁠—some destructive horror⁠—walking in upon me as I sit here?⁠ ⁠…”</p>
				<p>Razumov looked apprehensively towards the door of the outer room as if expecting some shape of evil to turn the handle and appear before him silently.</p>
				<p>“A common thief,” he said to himself, “finds more guarantees in the law he is breaking, and even a brute like Ziemianitch has his consolation.” Razumov envied the materialism of the thief and the passion of the incorrigible lover. The consequences of their actions were always clear and their lives remained their own.</p>
				<p>But he slept as soundly that night as though he had been consoling himself in the manner of Ziemianitch. He dropped off suddenly, lay like a log, remembered no dream on waking. But it was as if his soul had gone out in the night to gather the flowers of wrathful wisdom. He got up in a mood of grim determination and as if with a new knowledge of his own nature. He looked mockingly on the heap of papers on his table; and left his room to attend the lectures, muttering to himself, “We shall see.”</p>
				<p>He was in no humour to talk to anybody or hear himself questioned as to his absence from lectures the day before. But it was difficult to repulse rudely a very good comrade with a smooth pink face and fair hair, bearing the nickname amongst his fellow-students of “Madcap Kostia.” He was the idolized only son of a very wealthy and illiterate Government contractor, and attended the lectures only during the periodical fits of contrition following upon tearful paternal remonstrances. Noisily blundering like a retriever puppy, his elated voice and great gestures filled the bare academy corridors with the joy of thoughtless animal life, provoking indulgent smiles at a great distance. His usual discourses treated of trotting horses, wine-parties in expensive restaurants, and the merits of persons of easy virtue, with a disarming artlessness of outlook. He pounced upon Razumov about midday, somewhat less uproariously than his habit was, and led him aside.</p>
				<p>“Just a moment, Kirylo Sidorovitch. A few words here in this quiet corner.”</p>
				<p>He felt Razumov’s reluctance, and insinuated his hand under his arm caressingly.</p>
				<p>“No⁠—pray do. I don’t want to talk to you about any of my silly scrapes. What are my scrapes? Absolutely nothing. Mere childishness. The other night I flung a fellow out of a certain place where I was having a fairly good time. A tyrannical little beast of a quill-driver from the Treasury department. He was bullying the people of the house. I rebuked him. ‘You are not behaving humanely to God’s creatures that are a jolly sight more estimable than yourself,’ I said. I can’t bear to see any tyranny, Kirylo Sidorovitch. Upon my word I can’t. He didn’t take it in good part at all. ‘Who’s that impudent puppy?’ he begins to shout. I was in excellent form as it happened, and he went through the closed window very suddenly. He flew quite a long way into the yard. I raged like⁠—like a⁠—minotaur. The women clung to me and screamed, the fiddlers got under the table.⁠ ⁠… Such fun! My dad had to put his hand pretty deep into his pocket, I can tell you.” He chuckled.</p>
				<p>“My dad is a very useful man. Jolly good thing it is for me, too. I do get into unholy scrapes.”</p>
				<p>His elation fell. That was just it. What was his life? Insignificant; no good to anyone; a mere festivity. It would end some fine day in his getting his skull split with a champagne bottle in a drunken brawl. At such times, too, when men were sacrificing themselves to ideas. But he could never get any ideas into his head. His head wasn’t worth anything better than to be split by a champagne bottle.</p>
				<p>Razumov, protesting that he had no time, made an attempt to get away. The other’s tone changed to confidential earnestness.</p>
				<p>“For God’s sake, Kirylo, my dear soul, let me make some sort of sacrifice. It would not be a sacrifice really. I have my rich dad behind me. There’s positively no getting to the bottom of his pocket.”</p>
				<p>And rejecting indignantly Razumov’s suggestion that this was drunken raving, he offered to lend him some money to escape abroad with. He could always get money from his dad. He had only to say that he had lost it at cards or something of that sort, and at the same time promise solemnly not to miss a single lecture for three months on end. That would fetch the old man; and he, Kostia, was quite equal to the sacrifice. Though he really did not see what was the good for him to attend the lectures. It was perfectly hopeless.</p>
				<p>“Won’t you let me be of some use?” he pleaded to the silent Razumov, who with his eyes on the ground and utterly unable to penetrate the real drift of the other’s intention, felt a strange reluctance to clear up the point.</p>
				<p>“What makes you think I want to go abroad?” he asked at last very quietly.</p>
				<p>Kostia lowered his voice.</p>
				<p>“You had the police in your rooms yesterday. There are three or four of us who have heard of that. Never mind how we know. It is sufficient that we do. So we have been consulting together.”</p>
				<p>“Ah! You got to know that so soon,” muttered Razumov negligently.</p>
				<p>“Yes. We did. And it struck us that a man like you⁠ ⁠…”</p>
				<p>“What sort of a man do you take me to be?” Razumov interrupted him.</p>
				<p>“A man of ideas⁠—and a man of action too. But you are very deep, Kirylo. There’s no getting to the bottom of your mind. Not for fellows like me. But we all agreed that you must be preserved for our country. Of that we have no doubt whatever⁠—I mean all of us who have heard Haldin speak of you on certain occasions. A man doesn’t get the police ransacking his rooms without there being some devilry hanging over his head.⁠ ⁠… And so if you think that it would be better for you to bolt at once.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
				<p>Razumov tore himself away and walked down the corridor, leaving the other motionless with his mouth open. But almost at once he returned and stood before the amazed Kostia, who shut his mouth slowly. Razumov looked him straight in the eyes, before saying with marked deliberation and separating his words⁠—</p>
				<p>“I thank⁠—you⁠—very⁠—much.”</p>
				<p>He went away again rapidly. Kostia, recovering from his surprise at these manoeuvres, ran up behind him pressingly.</p>
				<p>“No! Wait! Listen. I really mean it. It would be like giving your compassion to a starving fellow. Do you hear, Kirylo? And any disguise you may think of, that too I could procure from a costumier, a Jew I know. Let a fool be made serviceable according to his folly. Perhaps also a false beard or something of that kind may be needed.</p>
				<p>“Razumov turned at bay.</p>
				<p>“There are no false beards needed in this business, Kostia⁠—you good-hearted lunatic, you. What do you know of my ideas? My ideas may be poison to you.” The other began to shake his head in energetic protest.</p>
				<p>“What have you got to do with ideas? Some of them would make an end of your dad’s money-bags. Leave off meddling with what you don’t understand. Go back to your trotting horses and your girls, and then you’ll be sure at least of doing no harm to anybody, and hardly any to yourself.”</p>
				<p>The enthusiastic youth was overcome by this disdain.</p>
				<p>“You’re sending me back to my pig’s trough, Kirylo. That settles it. I am an unlucky beast⁠—and I shall die like a beast too. But mind⁠—it’s your contempt that has done for me.”</p>
				<p>Razumov went off with long strides. That this simple and grossly festive soul should have fallen too under the revolutionary curse affected him as an ominous symptom of the time. He reproached himself for feeling troubled. Personally he ought to have felt reassured. There was an obvious advantage in this conspiracy of mistaken judgment taking him for what he was not. But was it not strange?</p>
				<p>Again he experienced that sensation of his conduct being taken out of his hands by Haldin’s revolutionary tyranny. His solitary and laborious existence had been destroyed⁠—the only thing he could call his own on this earth. By what right? he asked himself furiously. In what name?</p>
				<p>What infuriated him most was to feel that the “thinkers” of the University were evidently connecting him with Haldin⁠—as a sort of confidant in the background apparently. A mysterious connexion! Ha ha!⁠ ⁠… He had been made a personage without knowing anything about it. How that wretch Haldin must have talked about him! Yet it was likely that Haldin had said very little. The fellow’s casual utterances were caught up and treasured and pondered over by all these imbeciles. And was not all secret revolutionary action based upon folly, self-deception, and lies?</p>
				<p>“Impossible to think of anything else,” muttered Razumov to himself. “I’ll become an idiot if this goes on. The scoundrels and the fools are murdering my intelligence.”</p>
				<p>He lost all hope of saving his future, which depended on the free use of his intelligence.</p>
				<p>He reached the doorway of his house in a state of mental discouragement which enabled him to receive with apparent indifference an official-looking envelope from the dirty hand of the dvornik.</p>
				<p>“A gendarme brought it,” said the man. “He asked if you were at home. I told him ‘No, he’s not at home.’ So he left it. ‘Give it into his own hands,’ says he. Now you’ve got it⁠—eh?”</p>
				<p>He went back to his sweeping, and Razumov climbed his stairs, envelope in hand. Once in his room he did not hasten to open it. Of course this official missive was from the superior direction of the police. A suspect! A suspect!</p>
				<p>He stared in dreary astonishment at the absurdity of his position. He thought with a sort of dry, unemotional melancholy; three years of good work gone, the course of forty more perhaps jeopardized⁠—turned from hope to terror, because events started by human folly link themselves into a sequence which no sagacity can foresee and no courage can break through. Fatality enters your rooms while your landlady’s back is turned; you come home and find it in possession bearing a man’s name, clothed in flesh⁠—wearing a brown cloth coat and long boots⁠—lounging against the stove. It asks you, “Is the outer door closed?”⁠—and you don’t know enough to take it by the throat and fling it downstairs. You don’t know. You welcome the crazy fate. “Sit down,” you say. And it is all over. You cannot shake it off any more. It will cling to you for ever. Neither halter nor bullet can give you back the freedom of your life and the sanity of your thought.⁠ ⁠… It was enough to dash one’s head against a wall.</p>
				<p>Razumov looked slowly all round the walls as if to select a spot to dash his head against. Then he opened the letter. It directed the student Kirylo Sidorovitch Razumov to present himself without delay at the General Secretariat.</p>
				<p>Razumov had a vision of General T⁠—’s goggle eyes waiting for him⁠—the embodied power of autocracy, grotesque and terrible. He embodied the whole power of autocracy because he was its guardian. He was the incarnate suspicion, the incarnate anger, the incarnate ruthlessness of a political and social regime on its defence. He loathed rebellion by instinct. And Razumov reflected that the man was simply unable to understand a reasonable adherence to the doctrine of absolutism.</p>
				<p>“What can he want with me precisely⁠—I wonder?” he asked himself.</p>
				<p>As if that mental question had evoked the familiar phantom, Haldin stood suddenly before him in the room with an extraordinary completeness of detail. Though the short winter day had passed already into the sinister twilight of a land buried in snow, Razumov saw plainly the narrow leather strap round the Tcherkess coat. The illusion of that hateful presence was so perfect that he half expected it to ask, “Is the outer door closed?” He looked at it with hatred and contempt. Souls do not take a shape of clothing. Moreover, Haldin could not be dead yet. Razumov stepped forward menacingly; the vision vanished⁠—and turning short on his heel he walked out of his room with infinite disdain.</p>
				<p>But after going down the first flight of stairs it occurred to him that perhaps the superior authorities of police meant to confront him with Haldin in the flesh. This thought struck him like a bullet, and had he not clung with both hands to the banister he would have rolled down to the next landing most likely. His legs were of no use for a considerable time.⁠ ⁠… But why? For what conceivable reason? To what end?</p>
				<p>There could be no rational answer to these questions; but Razumov remembered the promise made by the General to Prince K⁠—. His action was to remain unknown.</p>
				<p>He got down to the bottom of the stairs, lowering himself as it were from step to step, by the banister. Under the gate he regained much of his firmness of thought and limb. He went out into the street without staggering visibly. Every moment he felt steadier mentally. And yet he was saying to himself that General T⁠— was perfectly capable of shutting him up in the fortress for an indefinite time. His temperament fitted his remorseless task, and his omnipotence made him inaccessible to reasonable argument.</p>
				<p>But when Razumov arrived at the Secretariat he discovered that he would have nothing to do with General T⁠—. It is evident from Mr. Razumov’s diary that this dreaded personality was to remain in the background. A civilian of superior rank received him in a private room after a period of waiting in outer offices where a lot of scribbling went on at many tables in a heated and stuffy atmosphere.</p>
				<p>The clerk in uniform who conducted him said in the corridor⁠—</p>
				<p>“You are going before Gregor Matvieitch Mikulin.”</p>
				<p>There was nothing formidable about the man bearing that name. His mild, expectant glance was turned on the door already when Razumov entered. At once, with the penholder he was holding in his hand, he pointed to a deep sofa between two windows. He followed Razumov with his eyes while that last crossed the room and sat down. The mild gaze rested on him, not curious, not inquisitive⁠—certainly not suspicious⁠—almost without expression. In its passionless persistence there was something resembling sympathy.</p>
				<p>Razumov, who had prepared his will and his intelligence to encounter General T⁠— himself, was profoundly troubled. All the moral bracing up against the possible excesses of power and passion went for nothing before this sallow man, who wore a full unclipped beard. It was fair, thin, and very fine. The light fell in coppery gleams on the protuberances of a high, rugged forehead. And the aspect of the broad, soft physiognomy was so homely and rustic that the careful middle parting of the hair seemed a pretentious affectation.</p>
				<p>The diary of Mr. Razumov testifies to some irritation on his part. I may remark here that the diary proper consisting of the more or less daily entries seems to have been begun on that very evening after Mr. Razumov had returned home.</p>
				<p>Mr. Razumov, then, was irritated. His strung-up individuality had gone to pieces within him very suddenly.</p>
				<p>“I must be very prudent with him,” he warned himself in the silence during which they sat gazing at each other. It lasted some little time, and was characterized (for silences have their character) by a sort of sadness imparted to it perhaps by the mild and thoughtful manner of the bearded official. Razumov learned later that he was the chief of a department in the General Secretariat, with a rank in the civil service equivalent to that of a colonel in the army.</p>
				<p>Razumov’s mistrust became acute. The main point was, not to be drawn into saying too much. He had been called there for some reason. What reason? To be given to understand that he was a suspect⁠—and also no doubt to be pumped. As to what precisely? There was nothing. Or perhaps Haldin had been telling lies.⁠ ⁠… Every alarming uncertainty beset Razumov. He could bear the silence no longer, and cursing himself for his weakness spoke first, though he had promised himself not to do so on any account.</p>
				<p>“I haven’t lost a moment’s time,” he began in a hoarse, provoking tone; and then the faculty of speech seemed to leave him and enter the body of Councillor Mikulin, who chimed in approvingly⁠—</p>
				<p>“Very proper. Very proper. Though as a matter of fact.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
				<p>But the spell was broken, and Razumov interrupted him boldly, under a sudden conviction that this was the safest attitude to take. With a great flow of words he complained of being totally misunderstood. Even as he talked with a perception of his own audacity he thought that the word “misunderstood” was better than the word “mistrusted,” and he repeated it again with insistence. Suddenly he ceased, being seized with fright before the attentive immobility of the official. “What am I talking about?” he thought, eyeing him with a vague gaze. Mistrusted⁠—not misunderstood⁠—was the right symbol for these people. Misunderstood was the other kind of curse. Both had been brought on his head by that fellow Haldin. And his head ached terribly. He passed his hand over his brow⁠—an involuntary gesture of suffering, which he was too careless to restrain. At that moment Razumov beheld his own brain suffering on the rack⁠—a long, pale figure drawn asunder horizontally with terrific force in the darkness of a vault, whose face he failed to see. It was as though he had dreamed for an infinitesimal fraction of time of some dark print of the Inquisition.</p>
				<p>It is not to be seriously supposed that Razumov had actually dozed off and had dreamed in the presence of Councillor Mikulin, of an old print of the Inquisition. He was indeed extremely exhausted, and he records a remarkably dream-like experience of anguish at the circumstance that there was no one whatever near the pale and extended figure. The solitude of the racked victim was particularly horrible to behold. The mysterious impossibility to see the face, he also notes, inspired a sort of terror. All these characteristics of an ugly dream were present. Yet he is certain that he never lost the consciousness of himself on the sofa, leaning forward with his hands between his knees and turning his cap round and round in his fingers. But everything vanished at the voice of Councillor Mikulin. Razumov felt profoundly grateful for the even simplicity of its tone.</p>
				<p>“Yes. I have listened with interest. I comprehend in a measure your⁠ ⁠… But, indeed, you are mistaken in what you.⁠ ⁠…” Councillor Mikulin uttered a series of broken sentences. Instead of finishing them he glanced down his beard. It was a deliberate curtailment which somehow made the phrases more impressive. But he could talk fluently enough, as became apparent when changing his tone to persuasiveness he went on: “By listening to you as I did, I think I have proved that I do not regard our intercourse as strictly official. In fact, I don’t want it to have that character at all.⁠ ⁠… Oh yes! I admit that the request for your presence here had an official form. But I put it to you whether it was a form which would have been used to secure the attendance of a.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
				<p>“Suspect,” exclaimed Razumov, looking straight into the official’s eyes. They were big with heavy eyelids, and met his boldness with a dim, steadfast gaze. “A suspect.” The open repetition of that word which had been haunting all his waking hours gave Razumov a strange sort of satisfaction. Councillor Mikulin shook his head slightly. “Surely you do know that I’ve had my rooms searched by the police?”</p>
				<p>“I was about to say a ‘misunderstood person,’ when you interrupted me,” insinuated quietly Councillor Mikulin.</p>
				<p>Razumov smiled without bitterness. The renewed sense of his intellectual superiority sustained him in the hour of danger. He said a little disdainfully⁠—</p>
				<p>“I know I am but a reed. But I beg you to allow me the superiority of the thinking reed over the unthinking forces that are about to crush him out of existence. Practical thinking in the last instance is but criticism. I may perhaps be allowed to express my wonder at this action of the police being delayed for two full days during which, of course, I could have annihilated everything compromising by burning it⁠—let us say⁠—and getting rid of the very ashes, for that matter.”</p>
				<p>“You are angry,” remarked the official, with an unutterable simplicity of tone and manner. “Is that reasonable?”</p>
				<p>Razumov felt himself colouring with annoyance.</p>
				<p>“I am reasonable. I am even⁠—permit me to say⁠—a thinker, though to be sure, this name nowadays seems to be the monopoly of hawkers of revolutionary wares, the slaves of some French or German thought⁠—devil knows what foreign notions. But I am not an intellectual mongrel. I think like a Russian. I think faithfully⁠—and I take the liberty to call myself a thinker. It is not a forbidden word, as far as I know.”</p>
				<p>“No. Why should it be a forbidden word?” Councillor Mikulin turned in his seat with crossed legs and resting his elbow on the table propped his head on the knuckles of a half-closed hand. Razumov noticed a thick forefinger clasped by a massive gold band set with a blood-red stone⁠—a signet ring that, looking as if it could weigh half a pound, was an appropriate ornament for that ponderous man with the accurate middle-parting of glossy hair above a rugged Socratic forehead.</p>
				<p>“Could it be a wig?” Razumov detected himself wondering with an unexpected detachment. His self-confidence was much shaken. He resolved to chatter no more. Reserve! Reserve! All he had to do was to keep the Ziemianitch episode secret with absolute determination, when the questions came. Keep Ziemianitch strictly out of all the answers.</p>
				<p>Councillor Mikulin looked at him dimly. Razumov’s self-confidence abandoned him completely. It seemed impossible to keep Ziemianitch out. Every question would lead to that, because, of course, there was nothing else. He made an effort to brace himself up. It was a failure. But Councillor Mikulin was surprisingly detached too.</p>
				<p>“Why should it be forbidden?” he repeated. “I too consider myself a thinking man, I assure you. The principal condition is to think correctly. I admit it is difficult sometimes at first for a young man abandoned to himself⁠—with his generous impulses undisciplined, so to speak⁠—at the mercy of every wild wind that blows. Religious belief, of course, is a great.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
				<p>Councillor Mikulin glanced down his beard, and Razumov, whose tension was relaxed by that unexpected and discursive turn, murmured with gloomy discontent⁠—</p>
				<p>“That man, Haldin, believed in God.”</p>
				<p>“Ah! You are aware,” breathed out Councillor Mikulin, making the point softly, as if with discretion, but making it nevertheless plainly enough, as if he too were put off his guard by Razumov’s remark. The young man preserved an impassive, moody countenance, though he reproached himself bitterly for a pernicious fool, to have given thus an utterly false impression of intimacy. He kept his eyes on the floor. “I must positively hold my tongue unless I am obliged to speak,” he admonished himself. And at once against his will the question, “Hadn’t I better tell him everything?” presented itself with such force that he had to bite his lower lip. Councillor Mikulin could not, however, have nourished any hope of confession. He went on⁠—</p>
				<p>“You tell me more than his judges were able to get out of him. He was judged by a commission of three. He would tell them absolutely nothing. I have the report of the interrogatories here, by me. After every question there stands ‘Refuses to answer⁠—refuses to answer.’ It’s like that page after page. You see, I have been entrusted with some further investigations around and about this affair. He has left me nothing to begin my investigations on. A hardened miscreant. And so, you say, he believed in.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
				<p>Again Councillor Mikulin glanced down his beard with a faint grimace; but he did not pause for long. Remarking with a shade of scorn that blasphemers also had that sort of belief, he concluded by supposing that Mr. Razumov had conversed frequently with Haldin on the subject.</p>
				<p>“No,” said Razumov loudly, without looking up. “He talked and I listened. That is not a conversation.”</p>
				<p>“Listening is a great art,” observed Mikulin parenthetically.</p>
				<p>“And getting people to talk is another,” mumbled Razumov.</p>
				<p>“Well, no⁠—that is not very difficult,” Mikulin said innocently, “except, of course, in special cases. For instance, this Haldin. Nothing could induce him to talk. He was brought four times before the delegated judges. Four secret interrogatories⁠—and even during the last, when your personality was put forward.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
				<p>“My personality put forward?” repeated Razumov, raising his head brusquely. “I don’t understand.” Councillor Mikulin turned squarely to the table, and taking up some sheets of grey foolscap dropped them one after another, retaining only the last in his hand. He held it before his eyes while speaking.</p>
				<p>“It was⁠—you see⁠—judged necessary. In a case of that gravity no means of action upon the culprit should be neglected. You understand that yourself, I am certain.</p>
				<p>“Razumov stared with enormous wide eyes at the side view of Councillor Mikulin, who now was not looking at him at all.</p>
				<p>“So it was decided (I was consulted by General T⁠—) that a certain question should be put to the accused. But in deference to the earnest wishes of Prince K⁠— your name has been kept out of the documents and even from the very knowledge of the judges themselves. Prince K⁠— recognized the propriety, the necessity of what we proposed to do, but he was concerned for your safety. Things do leak out⁠—that we can’t deny. One cannot always answer for the discretion of inferior officials. There was, of course, the secretary of the special tribunal⁠—one or two gendarmes in the room. Moreover, as I have said, in deference to Prince K⁠— even the judges themselves were to be left in ignorance. The question ready framed was sent to them by General T⁠— (I wrote it out with my own hand) with instructions to put it to the prisoner the very last of all. Here it is.</p>
				<p>“Councillor Mikulin threw back his head into proper focus and went on reading monotonously: ‘Question⁠—Has the man well known to you, in whose rooms you remained for several hours on Monday and on whose information you have been arrested⁠—has he had any previous knowledge of your intention to commit a political murder?⁠ ⁠…’ Prisoner refuses to reply.</p>
				<p>“Question repeated. Prisoner preserves the same stubborn silence.</p>
				<p>“The venerable Chaplain of the Fortress being then admitted and exhorting the prisoner to repentance, entreating him also to atone for his crime by an unreserved and full confession which should help to liberate from the sin of rebellion against the Divine laws and the sacred Majesty of the Ruler, our Christ-loving land⁠—the prisoner opens his lips for the first time during this morning’s audience and in a loud, clear voice rejects the venerable Chaplain’s ministrations.</p>
				<p>“At eleven o’clock the Court pronounces in summary form the death sentence.</p>
				<p>“The execution is fixed for four o’clock in the afternoon, subject to further instructions from superior authorities.”</p>
				<p>Councillor Mikulin dropped the page of foolscap, glanced down his beard, and turning to Razumov, added in an easy, explanatory tone⁠—</p>
				<p>“We saw no object in delaying the execution. The order to carry out the sentence was sent by telegraph at noon. I wrote out the telegram myself. He was hanged at four o’clock this afternoon.”</p>
				<p>The definite information of Haldin’s death gave Razumov the feeling of general lassitude which follows a great exertion or a great excitement. He kept very still on the sofa, but a murmur escaped him⁠—</p>
				<p>“He had a belief in a future existence.”</p>
				<p>Councillor Mikulin shrugged his shoulders slightly, and Razumov got up with an effort. There was nothing now to stay for in that room. Haldin had been hanged at four o’clock. There could be no doubt of that. He had, it seemed, entered upon his future existence, long boots, Astrakhan fur cap and all, down to the very leather strap round his waist. A flickering, vanishing sort of existence. It was not his soul, it was his mere phantom he had left behind on this earth⁠—thought Razumov, smiling caustically to himself while he crossed the room, utterly forgetful of where he was and of Councillor Mikulin’s existence. The official could have set a lot of bells ringing all over the building without leaving his chair. He let Razumov go quite up to the door before he spoke.</p>
				<p>“Come, Kirylo Sidorovitch⁠—what are you doing?”</p>
				<p>Razumov turned his head and looked at him in silence. He was not in the least disconcerted. Councillor Mikulin’s arms were stretched out on the table before him and his body leaned forward a little with an effort of his dim gaze.</p>
				<p>“Was I actually going to clear out like this?” Razumov wondered at himself with an impassive countenance. And he was aware of this impassiveness concealing a lucid astonishment.</p>
				<p>“Evidently I was going out if he had not spoken,” he thought. “What would he have done then? I must end this affair one way or another. I must make him show his hand.”</p>
				<p>For a moment longer he reflected behind the mask as it were, then let go the door-handle and came back to the middle of the room.</p>
				<p>“I’ll tell you what you think,” he said explosively, but not raising his voice. “You think that you are dealing with a secret accomplice of that unhappy man. No, I do not know that he was unhappy. He did not tell me. He was a wretch from my point of view, because to keep alive a false idea is a greater crime than to kill a man. I suppose you will not deny that? I hated him! Visionaries work everlasting evil on earth. Their Utopias inspire in the mass of mediocre minds a disgust of reality and a contempt for the secular logic of human development.”</p>
				<p>Razumov shrugged his shoulders and stared. “What a tirade!” he thought. The silence and immobility of Councillor Mikulin impressed him. The bearded bureaucrat sat at his post, mysteriously self-possessed like an idol with dim, unreadable eyes. Razumov’s voice changed involuntarily.</p>
				<p>“If you were to ask me where is the necessity of my hate for such as Haldin, I would answer you⁠—there is nothing sentimental in it. I did not hate him because he had committed the crime of murder. Abhorrence is not hate. I hated him simply because I am sane. It is in that character that he outraged me. His death⁠ ⁠…”</p>
				<p>Razumov felt his voice growing thick in his throat. The dimness of Councillor Mikulin’s eyes seemed to spread all over his face and made it indistinct to Razumov’s sight. He tried to disregard these phenomena.</p>
				<p>“Indeed,” he pursued, pronouncing each word carefully, “what is his death to me? If he were lying here on the floor I could walk over his breast.⁠ ⁠… The fellow is a mere phantom.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
				<p>Razumov’s voice died out very much against his will. Mikulin behind the table did not allow himself the slightest movement. The silence lasted for some little time before Razumov could go on again.</p>
				<p>“He went about talking of me. Those intellectual fellows sit in each other’s rooms and get drunk on foreign ideas in the same way young Guards’ officers treat each other with foreign wines. Merest debauchery.⁠ ⁠… Upon my Word,”⁠—Razumov, enraged by a sudden recollection of Ziemianitch, lowered his voice forcibly⁠—“upon my word, we Russians are a drunken lot. Intoxication of some sort we must have: to get ourselves wild with sorrow or maudlin with resignation; to lie inert like a log or set fire to the house. What is a sober man to do, I should like to know? To cut oneself entirely from one’s kind is impossible. To live in a desert one must be a saint. But if a drunken man runs out of the grog-shop, falls on your neck and kisses you on both cheeks because something about your appearance has taken his fancy, what then⁠—kindly tell me? You may break, perhaps, a cudgel on his back and yet not succeed in beating him off.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
				<p>Councillor Mikulin raised his hand and passed it down his face deliberately.</p>
				<p>“That’s⁠ ⁠… of course,” he said in an undertone.</p>
				<p>The quiet gravity of that gesture made Razumov pause. It was so unexpected, too. What did it mean? It had an alarming aloofness. Razumov remembered his intention of making him show his hand.</p>
				<p>“I have said all this to Prince K⁠—,” he began with assumed indifference, but lost it on seeing Councillor Mikulin’s slow nod of assent. “You know it? You’ve heard.⁠ ⁠… Then why should I be called here to be told of Haldin’s execution? Did you want to confront me with his silence now that the man is dead? What is his silence to me! This is incomprehensible. You want in some way to shake my moral balance.”</p>
				<p>“No. Not that,” murmured Councillor Mikulin, just audibly. “The service you have rendered is appreciated.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
				<p>“Is it?” interrupted Razumov ironically.</p>
				<p>“… and your position too.” Councillor Mikulin did not raise his voice. “But only think! You fall into Prince K⁠—’s study as if from the sky with your startling information.⁠ ⁠… You are studying yet, Mr. Razumov, but we are serving already⁠—don’t forget that.⁠ ⁠… And naturally some curiosity was bound to.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
				<p>Councillor Mikulin looked down his beard. Razumov’s lips trembled.</p>
				<p>“An occurrence of that sort marks a man,” the homely murmur went on. “I admit I was curious to see you. General T⁠— thought it would be useful, too.⁠ ⁠… Don’t think I am incapable of understanding your sentiments. When I was young like you I studied.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
				<p>“Yes⁠—you wished to see me,” said Razumov in a tone of profound distaste. “Naturally you have the right⁠—I mean the power. It all amounts to the same thing. But it is perfectly useless, if you were to look at me and listen to me for a year. I begin to think there is something about me which people don’t seem able to make out. It’s unfortunate. I imagine, however, that Prince K⁠— understands. He seemed to.”</p>
				<p>Councillor Mikulin moved slightly and spoke.</p>
				<p>“Prince K⁠— is aware of everything that is being done, and I don’t mind informing you that he approved my intention of becoming personally acquainted with you.”</p>
				<p>Razumov concealed an immense disappointment under the accents of railing surprise.</p>
				<p>“So he is curious too!⁠ ⁠… Well⁠—after all, Prince K⁠— knows me very little. It is really very unfortunate for me, but⁠—it is not exactly my fault.”</p>
				<p>Councillor Mikulin raised a hasty deprecatory hand and inclined his head slightly over his shoulder.</p>
				<p>“Now, Mr. Razumov⁠—is it necessary to take it in that way? Everybody I am sure can.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
				<p>He glanced rapidly down his beard, and when he looked up again there was for a moment an interested expression in his misty gaze. Razumov discouraged it with a cold, repellent smile.</p>
				<p>“No. That’s of no importance to be sure⁠—except that in respect of all this curiosity being aroused by a very simple matter.⁠ ⁠… What is to be done with it? It is unappeasable. I mean to say there is nothing to appease it with. I happen to have been born a Russian with patriotic instincts⁠—whether inherited or not I am not in a position to say.”</p>
				<p>Razumov spoke consciously with elaborate steadiness.</p>
				<p>“Yes, patriotic instincts developed by a faculty of independent thinking⁠—of detached thinking. In that respect I am more free than any social democratic revolution could make me. It is more than probable that I don’t think exactly as you are thinking. Indeed, how could it be? You would think most likely at this moment that I am elaborately lying to cover up the track of my repentance.”</p>
				<p>Razumov stopped. His heart had grown too big for his breast. Councillor Mikulin did not flinch.</p>
				<p>“Why so?” he said simply. “I assisted personally at the search of your rooms. I looked through all the papers myself. I have been greatly impressed by a sort of political confession of faith. A very remarkable document. Now may I ask for what purpose.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
				<p>“To deceive the police naturally,” said Razumov savagely.⁠ ⁠… “What is all this mockery? Of course you can send me straight from this room to Siberia. That would be intelligible. To what is intelligible I can submit. But I protest against this comedy of persecution. The whole affair is becoming too comical altogether for my taste. A comedy of errors, phantoms, and suspicions. It’s positively indecent.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
				<p>Councillor Mikulin turned an attentive ear. “Did you say phantoms?” he murmured.</p>
				<p>“I could walk over dozens of them.” Razumov, with an impatient wave of his hand, went on headlong, “But, really, I must claim the right to be done once for all with that man. And in order to accomplish this I shall take the liberty.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
				<p>Razumov on his side of the table bowed slightly to the seated bureaucrat.</p>
				<p>“… To retire⁠—simply to retire,” he finished with great resolution.</p>
				<p>He walked to the door, thinking, “Now he must show his hand. He must ring and have me arrested before I am out of the building, or he must let me go. And either way.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
				<p>An unhurried voice said⁠—</p>
				<p>“Kirylo Sidorovitch.” Razumov at the door turned his head.</p>
				<p>“To retire,” he repeated.</p>
				<p>“Where to?” asked Councillor Mikulin softly.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
